# CHAPTER EIGHT: Conclusions and Implications

Risk-free and easily digestible theatre doesn't interest us. A non-commercial and risk-taking independent theatre, which values community and honors the possibility of the unforeseen encounter/connection is as rare as a needle in a haystack … but it does exist!

Asha Richard68

In the opening to this thesis I call up the words of Morris Berman, who announces that if we are to "come to our senses" as a civilisation we must embrace the "things that really matter" like the "magic of interpersonal interactions"; things, he declares, we are most likely to find on the margins (Berman, 1990, p.341). In this closing chapter, I include the words of Asha Richard. She urges that the truth of human encounter is possible if one dares to engage in an experience of theatre that is non-commercial and risk-taking, like that evoked through the one-off community-based Playback Theatre context explored in this study. Playback Theatre is a performance event that engages audience members through its uncanny familiarity, intrigues audience members through its magical mystery, and awakens them through its raw and honest placement of the personal in the public domain. The mixed responses that audience members have to this hybrid performance form render it complex on the one hand, and on the other, a resemblance of the very mundane that is at the heart of human existence. An experience made possible only through the disturbances wrought by the ritual framing of a

68 In Fox & Dauber (1999, p.115).

theatre event that stands boldly on the cultural margins welcoming citizen actors alongside the stories of all including those who may otherwise be overlooked, avoided or discarded.

I began this study as a broad inquiry into Playback Theatre. I reach the end with a better understanding of the possible contributions and limitations of the one-off community-based performance event through the perspective of audience members. This chapter is dedicated to drawing together my conclusions and making recommendations. I present a summary of the findings in light of the questions that guided the research journey. I consider the implications of the research and make recommendations for purposeful and strategic Playback Theatre production as a one-off community-based event. Implications for performer-practitioner formation and development are discussed and recommendations toward further research are made.

**8.1** **Audience Members' Experiences of Playback Theatre**

This study nominated the one-off community-based Playback Theatre performance as the focus of inquiry. The central question of the study was:

- What are audience members' experiences of this one-off community-based event?

I present a summary of the findings that indirectly address the three sub-questions the study sought to answer. The sub-questions were:

- In what ways do the audience members engage and respond during and after the one-off community-based event?
- In what ways does the Playback Theatre form induce these experiences?
- In what ways is Playback Theatre an experience of community for audience members within the specific context?

The summing up focuses on the two key audience positions the study has identified - those of participant and spectator, and the resulting tension of participation and reflective distance. I report on the way in which audience members have engaged and responded and conclude that the way in which the Playback Theatre form ritualises time and converges the public and private is pivotal for experiences of flow and communitas. Barriers to flow in the specific performance context of the study are outlined. A snapshot of various experiences of tellers and non-tellers is included. I then review the findings that demonstrate the connections that audience members have felt and made and their experiences of listening.

**8.1.1 Participant-Spectator See-Saw: A tension of participation**

The one-off event acts as a community forum where people from all walks of life come and participate. The dynamics of involvement or participation appear to be in a kind of see-sawing relationship with the act of watching or spectating. The easy rhythm of this see-saw is somewhat dependent on audience members' initial engagement, their capacity to move into and out of reflective distance, and the factors that help or hinder this. In ritualising the community gathering through the Playback Theatre form, participants respond to the invitation implicit in the form and seem empowered or challenged, or stimulated to be involved. This involvement may be greater than or different to what they would expect at a different kind of public meeting. Unlike some traditional ritual performances, the liminal opportunity afforded through the ritualised structure of the Playback Theatre performance has not induced deep trance states for audience members. The study showed that audience members at Playback Theatre have been constantly engaged by the invitation to participate and committed considerable energy to justifying to themselves why they might volunteer to tell a story. Early in the performance, this usually led them to sort through and if possible discard or reframe what might serve to impede their participation. This sorting process represented the segregation of audience members from their ordinary everyday world with its protocols and structures to the ephemeral world of the ritual performance. Individuals' experience of this separation stage intrinsically affected the way they engaged in the Playback Theatre ritual.

Sitting with the constant possibility of volunteering to participate was a preoccupation for many audience members. They became occupied by their repeated preparation to tell a story.

Some felt compelled to participate. Others were preoccupied with a persistent reluctance to tell. Those with a desire to tell often undertook an elaborate inner-dialogue in which they examined this desire. This inner-dialogue involved a negotiation of their personal values and some reflection on the possible consequences of participating. Audience members assessed new information and considered any intuitive incongruency they felt in response to the Playback Theatre process. The dynamic of reflective distance enhanced the engagement of the audience and introduced a tension of participation. Tension of participation could be considered the more potent tension underpinning audience members' experiences of the one-off community-based Playback Theatre event; more than the dramatic tensions emerging from the performative acts of storytelling and enacting.

The liminal or transition phase of the Playback Theatre performance was characterised by moments of unselfconsciousness, high spontaneity and experiences of flow for audience members. It is likely that the repeated invitation to participate implicit in the Playback Theatre form and regularly made explicit by the conductor gave impetus to experiences of flow. Certain elements in the form converged to enable participants to join in. This usually meant that the challenge present in the task of participating was not too difficult for the individual.

The improvised nature of the performance represented too great a challenge for some audience members resulting in anxiety or confusion. Feelings of anxiety inhibited individuals' spontaneity and were a barrier to participation. This acted to impede their entry into the transition or liminal stage of the ritual performance.

Flow coincided with those times when participants felt some resolution with respect to values conflict or risk challenges arising during the performance. This was most often with respect to whether to participate as a storyteller yet could also be connected to reaching a new level of understanding about the rules of engagement and the collective culture of the audience; information that emerged as the performance progressed. The constancy of the in-and-out experience of reflective distance as audience members assimilated into the new and often unusual social environment evoked in the Playback Theatre performance was significant for those without prior experience of the form. Audience members who were familiar with Playback Theatre experienced this in-and-outness in the initial stages as they familiarised themselves with who was in the audience and anticipated the transition phases of the ritual.

Taking the metaphorical space afforded through reflective distance enabled many audience members to integrate their responses and remain open to the liminal activity. Reflective distance could coincide with a flow break for an individual where they move away from the liminal activity for brief moments.

**8.1.2 A Break in Flow: Barriers to participation**

A move to reflective distance by new and experienced audience members often coincided with a break in the flow experience. A number of factors contributed to a flow break and acted as barriers to audience participation. Some audience members felt uneasy about fully entering the Playback Theatre performance due to some ambivalence about what was expected of them.

This was often overcome when they established some familiarity with the ritual and felt as though they understood the rules of participation implicit in the form and the rules of engagement being negotiated simultaneously among those gathered. At this point, audience members were able to relax and surrender to the liminal activities offered by the Playback Theatre event. Flow was disturbed when surprise or shock, or unwanted thoughts, e.g. judgement about self or others induced a reasoning state in individuals as they strived to make sense of unexpected feelings or thoughts. Contradictions felt by the audience at these times could result in a surge or a drop in the performance energy or interrupt the collective experience of communitas.

Participation could be further impeded by the challenge present in the prospect of performing.

A growing familiarity with the form helped overcome this challenge. Anxiety about performing posed a significant barrier to participation. Boredom, disappointment, and feelings of alienation further restricted participation and disturbed the collective experience of the audience. Similarly, concern about others, dissatisfaction with the quality of the artistry, and discomfort arising from emotional responses limited an individual's capacity to surrender.

These barriers to participation could result in people excluding themselves from the activity altogether. This included ruling out the possibility of sharing a story. Self-regulation such as this tended to interfere with a person's capacity to enter the liminal zone and achieve flow.

However if self-regulation was due to feelings of uncertainty, it sometimes freed some participants to engage more fully in other ways. There was, however, an instance where audience members self-regulated by removing themselves from the performance altogether.

The prospect of participation triggered resistance in some due to a fear of exposure. This was contingent on who was in the audience, whether they were strange or familiar, and what rules of engagement and disclosure existed within the specific (public) context. It could also be due to the size of the audience. Fear of exposure was generally more problematic at the context-specific performances than at the open public performances. In the former, a sensitive interplay occurred between the anonymity of the public event and the familiarity brought about through individual's various relationships within the context. Some people became worried about who was in the audience and the consequences of revealing too much or became concerned about being judged. These dynamics were also in play at the open public performances for some people who attended in friendship groups. Lack of ease regarding exposing others also inhibited participation. Any factor that induced fear, uncertainty or anxiety acted to inhibit flow for the audience.

**8.1.3 Snapshot: Telling stories**

Storytellers at the one-off community-based Playback Theatre performance had a variety of responses to their experience of performing. From the results of this study, I have concluded that the telling performance was usually a moment of heightened engagement for audience members. The storyteller's response tended to focus on the actors' and the audience members' responses to them and the way in which they were revelatory or not. The storytelling audience member was often highly appreciative and had strong affiliation with the actors and conductor after telling. Some non-telling audience members experienced a high degree of discomfort with the storytelling performance. The results suggest that this might have been linked to the personal values of the audience members with regard to the public nature of the telling or the perceived vulnerability of the teller. In some contexts the social protocols and values conflicted with the Playback Theatre values. This was a particular concern in the performance where there were refugee and asylum seekers in the audience and appears linked to the tension that can arise between some audience members desire to protect refugees from exploitation and the perceived pressure in the repeated invitation to participate.

**8.1.4 Snapshot: Non-tellers**

There were occasions at the Playback Theatre performance when an audience member was featured in a story told by another. Two particular experiences by non-tellers warrant specific mention in this summary. One of these occurred when an audience member featured in a story told by another. The non-teller in the story experienced feelings of shock and exposure. Additional consequences for the non-teller were varied. The revelation was surprising with the non-teller feeling betrayed or stunned by the teller's perspective of them or of the incident.

Non-tellers also experienced relief and appreciation after they had taken some time for reflection and claimed to have gained some insight into themselves and the teller.

A second unique experience for non-tellers arose when they resisted repeated persistent urges to tell a story. This occurred when the audience member deemed that the environment lacked what they required to enable them to surrender to the invitation to tell. The study has reported on one audience member who experienced disappointment in response to his decision to resist telling and concluded that there are some instances when an individual may never feel prepared to tell their story during the one-off community-based Playback Theatre performance. In some ways, this audience member was unprepared to trust himself or the group under the momentum of the ritual. He did, however, overcome this during the after-show period.

**8.1.5 An Experience of Communitas: Connection through stories**

Experiences of communitas occurred as audience members witnessed the telling and the dramatisation of personal stories. It was during these times that audience members relaxed to watch and listen. The heightened intra-personal activity generated by the invitation to tell was (mostly) transformed when someone was selected to tell a story. At this time, the tension of participation abated, easing the expectation an individual may have placed on themself to act.

This shift resulted in a move away from heightened individualised engagement due to the possibilities of participation inherent in the form, to become other-focused. The audience shared the experience of listening and watching. This was a shift away from individual agency toward the formation of a collective watching audience. While there was no certainty that whole audiences had an experience of communitas at every moment, the study found that many times during a performance a number of audience members shared a simultaneous experience of watching, listening, or reflecting. This was reinforced during the after-show period, which revealed that many audience members checked in with one another to ascertain how their experiences may have intersected. This also occurred at times during performances when the conductor created moments for audience members to acknowledge shared and diverse responses.

Communitas could be understood as a group experience of flow. Simultaneous experiences of flow among audience members equated to momentary experiences of communitas arising from a collective emotional response (e.g. laughter or tears) to a story or a spontaneously altered perspective and to the simple sharing of applause. At the performances that feature in this study, a number of people in the audience were found to simultaneously identify with the teller or other characters presented in a story. There were also audience members who had little collective engagement with a story. Often this was transformed when the story was dramatised. Spontaneous collective experience arose through the connections audience members made with and through stories. Mostly, the teller's performance was a unique and compelling collective experience. However, just as the invitation to participate resulted in audience members moving in and out of flow, the invitation to watch and listen produced moments of moving toward (the teller) and moving away. At times listening to someone tell a story was potentially the most riveting and the most distancing part of the ritual experience. Some audience members experienced communitas through a shared aversion to listening to a particular teller. Listening was sometimes challenging and complicated.

**8.1.6 The Challenge of Listening: Overcoming estrangement**

The verbal narrative performance is a duet with the conductor. This performance requires a certain kind of listening and sometimes proved difficult for audience members due to perceived values expressed through choice of language, vocal tone and delivery, body language, length, and their familiarity with the socio-cultural content. The representation of the worlds in the story through the Playback Theatre enactment mostly rendered a vivid animation for audience members and brought delayed communitas. The enactment amplified the story and offered multiple perspectives or multiple interpretations of the story making it more accessible. This was a second chance to hear the story. These multiple moments of connection and re-connection formed a series of moments of communitas in the Playback Theatre performance.

The listening required first in the telling then in the watching further ritualised time and space. This enabled audience members to engage with people they might otherwise avoid or possibly never meet. This sometimes led to audience members overcoming indifference, developing curiosity about another, noticing how they were different or similar to someone depicted on stage, and gaining insight into how their worldview influences the way they perceive another person. When audience members experienced connection through stories they experienced a heightened collective engagement. The opposite was true when there was little or no recognition of the experiences of the characters depicted on stage. When an individual audience member failed to experience communitas they became progressively more alienated and critical and excluded themselves in some way. For some this led to total disengagement.

The collective sharing of the event represented an experience of community for people. Some audience members were motivated to extend their experience when the performance was over. This occurred as a natural continuation of the ritual process. In cooling down after their experiences of heightened connection, audience members often congregated and told more stories. They also engaged in shared reflection. This built the realism of the experience and began to incorporate the effects of the ritual for individuals and the group. People sometimes discussed the way in which a story or the performance touched them or the insight they derived from it. There was scope for audience members to reflect on the way their life experiences differed from what was shared or shown during the performance. This extension of the ritual contributed to or reinforced audience members perceived or assumed experiences of communitas during the performance.

Discussion about the performance and what it invoked continued beyond the formal performance frame as people completed the incorporation of the liminal experience. This was a readying to re-enter the structured world and relinquish the privileges of the ritualised world.

A few people expressed concern that incorporation was not straightforward for some and recommended a debriefing process. For most, an experience of Playback Theatre stimulated personal reflection and encouraged a move toward personal action.

**8.2** **A Consideration of the Possible Limitations of the Study**

The methodology chosen for the study enhanced the trustworthiness of the findings. Using a multiple method approach facilitated verification. This was accomplished by searching for similarities and difference between data that was generated from the audience, the co-observers and reflective partners, and my reflexive process. Despite this rigor, the study was constrained by a number of decisions that impact on the way in which the findings must now be considered.

The findings relate to the specific one-off community-based performance. Playback Theatre has application in a number of other contexts, e.g., as a workshop process, as part of a series of sessions featuring a number of methods (theatre and non-theatre), or as a series of events within the same community or organisational context. While some of the findings may be relevant to these other contexts, I do not claim that they can generalise across other applications of Playback Theatre. Readers can draw their own conclusions.

The study was also constrained by the Company focus. The composition of the Brisbane Playback Theatre Company is predominantly (white) lower-middle and middle class with a diversity that spans many of the categories within which the performances in the study featured: mental health, ethnicity, sexuality, disability, class and race. The performances in the study are a product of this Company's collaboration with the various audiences. While many of the findings may be relevant to other companies, the unique composition of the Company, the composition of the audience and wider community context in which the performances were based must be taken into consideration.

Situating the study in one city also limits the application of the findings. Brisbane is developing into a multicultural city, however it still has a predominantly anglo culture. The newer ethnic diverse populations are not fully integrated. The populations who attended the performances during the study appeared to be representative of Brisbane's cultural mix. The findings may be of interest to other Australian and possibly New Zealand cities. The study however can make no claims to generalise. It does however make a significant contribution to the way in which the one-off community-based Playback Theatre performance can be considered as a metaphor for community.

**8.3** **Implications arising from the Research**

The study illuminates how the collision of structure and anti-structure in the Playback Theatre performance yields a compelling social environment. The combined forces of public ritual and improvised performance act exponentially to induce risk taking and listening where participants are beckoned to perform in the reciprocal spirit of call and response. The call of the solo voices (storytellers) and the responses of the ensemble (the audience) evoke a potent metaphor for democratic community life. Like all call and response performances the leadership is interchangeable, from teller to conductor, conductor to musician, musician to actors, stage to audience. In this section I consider the implications arising from the study. I document the implications for performance. I discuss the implications for practice including practitioner and Company development in the context considered in the study.

**8.3.1 Implications for Performance**

Mock (2000) and Schechner (1985) acknowledge that a performance starts well before the audience arrives and has resonances beyond the stage-focused period. The focus on the application of Playback Theatre as a one-off community-based performance in this study highlights a number of implications for pre- and post-production periods, and for the discrete formal performance period, particularly in terms of initial engagement. In this section I examine these implications and discuss further implications for the promotion of anti-oppressive Playback Theatre practice.

*Pre-production - preparation to perform*

The study has found that the preparation period for the one-off community-based Playback Theatre performance involves at least two discrete threads: the context in which the performance is conceived and the Company that is preparing to respond. Mock's (2000) framework suggests this period integrates conception and development. Schechner (1985) alludes to training, workshops, rehearsals, warm-up required in pre-production.

For context-specific events the conception usually originates in the community of interest, whereas, the Company conceives open public performance events. The study findings suggest that the former require a specific and deliberate development phase by agents in the context mostly in collaboration with the conductor. The context-specific communities were represented in the thesis by four performances: Disability Access Week, Pride, Mental Health Week, and Refugee Week. While these are communities of interest, it does not pre-suppose that people came to the public event with a shared history in relation to the context or in relation to the designated purpose of the event. Audiences are just as likely to be and feel disparate until a sub-context is established in the first moments of the event.

The study reveals that the establishment of a sub-context is a fundamental dimension of the open public performances hosted by the Company. The specific and political framing of the Reconciliation performance created a strong focus for audience members and resulted in an eclectic array of stories that interacted to reveal a multifaceted dialogue about reconciliation.

The same ritual authority by the Company and the conductor is required for the context initiated event and thus demands thorough engagement with the context by the conductor in the lead up to preparing the Company to perform.

In preparing for the context-specific event, the performing ensemble (Company) will benefit from reflecting from the perspective of Schechner's pre-production process. There will be occasions when performers do not have the required training for some contexts, or have not undertaken sufficient rehearsal. The study suggests that the Company must balance the needs of the community with of the needs of individuals in the Company. The intense interpersonal nature of performing Playback Theatre demands that actors be prepared to consider their strengths and weaknesses in light of the context. This requires the Playback Theatre Company to develop a culture of discernment and a robustness around discussing the appropriateness of individual performers in specific contexts, keeping in mind that potent dramatic enactment is contingent on relationships, diversity and emotional resilience.

The purposeful and strategic application of Playback Theatre demands an open and honest collaboration between the Company and the community. It is necessary for the conductor to commence the sensitive process of inquiry from the outset while also representing the possible strengths and weaknesses of Playback Theatre and the Company that will perform. The intention in this consultative process is to maximise the likelihood of the performance being successful through the establishment of conditions that support a reasonably accurate preparation warm-up. The study reveals that many people come to Playback Theatre unaware of what is required. Comprehensive preparation by the conductor in partnership with those representing the context will assist the Company to be as prepared as possible. This is essential. While Playback Theatre is improvised and actors are trained in spontaneity, this preparation will assist the Company to lead the community into the ritual. If the audience flounders due to the possible surprises and feelings of uncertainty that can arise when they encounter Playback Theatre for the first time, the ensemble will have done the preparation. This does not mean the ensemble will overcome the likelihood of surprise, rather it will result in a wide and tested individual and group repertoire to draw from when responding to the new situations that arise.

*The performance*

Mock (2000) represents this stage as the dialectical process of presentation and reception. In Schechner's (1985) model it is simply *the performance*. The study illuminates two significant findings that have implications for Playback Theatre during the formal performance part of the ritual process. One concerns the challenges presented to audience members in initial engagement, the other relates to the tension arising out of the invitation to participate implicit in the form. Many audience members were similarly pre-occupied during these times.

The period of initial engagement is a particularly unstable time in the one-off community-based performance with audience members negotiating the separation from the ordinary domestic to the heightened ritualised social environment. In the first moments of the performance, audience members are looking for direction. The structural framework must be established efficiently, without minimising the expanse required for exploration. There is scope for Companies to maximise the ceremony during this time, however there is also a need to assist audience members to find a point of entry to the event. This suggests a need for hosting and inviting. The balancing act for conductor and ensemble involves establishing both the artistic and interactive nature of the experience. The additional balance between the ritual evocation and the social transitional needs of the event also require fine treatment. The conductor must find a way to move between the two efficiently - a contradictory time that calls for maximising the transparency of the process while elevating the mystery. This requires strong artistic and ritualistic production values.

Beyond initial engagement, audience members experience a tension of participation. The findings reveal that this gives significant momentum to the ritual, however it also serves to block it. Implications arise for conductors around how to harness this participative energy. Working with this energy is complex and demands conscious and sophisticated conducting. The conductor must enter the flow and ride the wave, interacting with the audience to build the tension between each story so that it contributes to elevating the overall dramatic experience. Choosing a teller too quickly for example might extinguish this potent energy.

Audience members may begin to relax (or withdraw) if they begin to think they won't be chosen. In between stories the conductor must work to maximise the audience's expectation that they 'could be next'. The conductor must strive for neutral text or span a diverse palette. Again, investing audience members with the idea that there are multiple possibilities for the next story. This sensitive task could lead to the conductor waiting too long. The rhythm required in the move from enactment to audience to storyteller equates to maximising the momentum derived from the tension of participation. The overflow of this energy drives the after-show period.

*After-show period*

Mock (2000) suggests that after the show the audience will be reflective. Schechner (1985) proposes they "cool down" (p.16) and then enter the aftermath stage. Implications arising from the study with respect to the after-show period point to the need for Companies and community organisers to extend the performance in a way that formalises this period. Audience members incorporate their experiences during this time. They engage in reflective discussion and they tell more stories. Some require debriefing. There is scope for performances with specific contexts, especially those promoted as forums or dialogues (e.g.

reconciliation), to facilitate a more formal after-show discussion. This is a useful way for people to integrate the intellectual responses to the topic alongside the emotional/metaphoric experience of the performance.

The after-show period is also implicated as a time when the community could take responsibility for assisting people to incorporate their experience of the performance. This instills the notion of respect for the community's capacity to respond. In some cases, it might be necessary to set up formal processes for this. This implication arose out of my experience of and response to the Refugee Week performance.

The refugee week context had inherent stakeholder hierarchies that remained active despite the possibility that the ritualised nature of the event would act to destabilise them.

Professionals in the field expressed their concern about the vulnerability of refugees during the performance. I observed an undercurrent of alarm in their responses that did not seem congruent with what had occurred during the performance. It occurred to me that perhaps the workers were under some form of scrutiny and that this had rendered them cautious and alert. Later, I concluded that it was more likely that they were stressed and that they cared deeply for their clients. In Brisbane, many people working in the refugee sector have their own experience of migration and resettlement. While they have not been refugees, it is common that they had left homelands that were in conflict and had experiences of separation from their families. They are passionate about the plight of refugees (and asylum seekers). The after show period became crucial to the incorporation of this experience for many of the workers who needed to state their concerns and make recommendations for future applications of Playback Theatre. My contact with them immediately after the event, one week later, and then again, twelve months later suggested that some were still completing some form of incorporation. One after-show response that appeared potentially useful was to conduct a performance for the workers. Here they could tell stories about the constant listening they do, about the successful resettlement of people, or stories that express vicarious trauma.

The research implicates the value of specific follow-up by the Company. While performance evaluation is a difficult process, continuing the process of inquiry in the community following a performance can lead to a number of outcomes. Significantly, it assists the conductor and the Company to incorporate the performance in relationship to the context. Follow-up can be as simple as a phone call with the organiser, however ongoing inquiry with audience members is useful. Ideally, this would occur within a week of the performance and in a group discussion format. This alleviates any chance of re-engaging the intensity of the performance. Companies will find use for this information in training and rehearsal. Perhaps more importantly, the ongoing inquiry acknowledges that the Company and practitioner (conductor) are part of the broader community, made more so by the sharing of the performance experience. This additional opportunity for incorporation has the potential to demystify the Company and lead to a greater acknowledgment of the collaborative nature of the performance.

*Promoting anti-oppressive Playback Theatre practice*

Playback Theatre has a natural affinity with contexts predicated on anti-oppressive practice values of self-advocacy, liberation of voice, re-storying lives, or dialogic process. The study suggests that individuals embedded in these contexts, e.g. Disability and Mental Health sectors could tend to see immediate value in the Playback Theatre form due to the centrality of personal story. Practitioners and Companies must be mindful of the way contexts such as these embrace Playback Theatre and be prepared to activate a critical consideration of the appropriateness of Playback Theatre for the purposes that are stated. In these instances, practitioners might be required to interrogate the proposed purposes for implicit oppressive assumptions being made about the relevance and usefulness of Playback Theatre.

The promotion of stories for story sake in these contexts can be problematic for the Playback Theatre Company. The eager way in which agents in these contexts see a place for Playback Theatre demands extra vigilance by the Company and practitioner during consultation and preparation. There is a risk that the agent of the community of interest will see immediate relevance in the Playback Theatre form. This could lead to a consultation process premised on an assumption of 'goodness of fit'. In earlier work on the exploration of the use of story-based methods with people with disability (Dennis, 2001), I caution that personal stories can be so compelling that we cannot leave them alone. I write, that "most of us [have] a deep and abiding curiosity for that rare glimpse into the complex diversity and rich texture of the lives of others" (p.43). The combined curiosity of the agent of the community and the Playback Theatre practitioner could lead to indiscriminate application of Playback Theatre. However, sensitive and accomplished pre-production investigation and conducting in these contexts can result in significant dialogic and community-building outcomes69.

The context driven nature of a number of the performances in the study introduces factors that require consideration for the Playback Theatre practitioner-performer. Communities of interests like the ones that feature in the study often have implicit hierarchies. This renders the audience and the conducting of the audience, a potentially political process. Conscious and courageous conducting is required to ensure people become aware of the way in which their professional or client identities may help or hinder their engagement. This demands a practice style that resists the imperialist traps of reinforcing the dominant voices, alienating minority voices or worse still making minority voices vulnerable to exploitation. Performances in these contexts require proactive pre-production. The audiences at these events require sophisticated

69The most illustrative example of this arose from The Disability Action Week performance. This event hosted a diverse audience from the Commissioner for disability discrimination, multiple levels of bureaucrats, service providers, advocates and people with disability. The study was not able to measure the efficacy of the Playback Theatre event within this context in relation to historical efforts at communication across stakeholders, however the Commissioner commented: 'you've achieved more here in an hour than we have in the past five years' (DAW03, L65).

conducting based on inquiry and risk taking. This involves deliberate and thoughtful conducting that repeatedly makes explicit who is there, who is missing, who has told, what voices are absent, what stories are absent.

The application of Playback Theatre in sympathetic contexts could be problematic when Companies privilege their desire to do Playback Theatre over the needs and purposes of the audience. Ultimately Companies have a purpose for doing Playback Theatre and for doing the specific shows. It is appropriate that the Company purpose drive public performance events. However, there is a risk that Playback Theatre Companies might subvert their purpose in their eagerness to perform Playback Theatre in various contexts and in doing so possibly undermine the purpose for the community in which they perform and the overarching purpose of Playback Theatre. This is a dilemma because Playback Theatre is best learned in practice. This does not eliminate the necessity for emerging and established Companies to continue to consider each potential one-off community-based performance on its merits and the merits of the Company members. As suggested earlier, this requires a commitment to comprehensive pre-production consultation and a preparedness to consider not undertaking the work.

**8.3.2 Implications for Formation and Development**

The research raises a number of implications for practitioner and Company formation and development. Inferred throughout the discussion on implications arising for the performance of Playback Theatre in the one-off community-based context are a number of implications for Company development. The socio-cultural history and performance repertoire of the Playback Theatre Company is an aggregate of the socio-cultural history and performance repertoire of the members. The research implicates the interrogation of personal and Company biases and assumptions with respect to Playback Theatre and contexts of practice. Undertaking an analysis of how various values and experiences of Company members converge to influence the work of the Company and the possible interaction with specific audiences would assist Companies in a number of ways and enhance their capacity for performing good Playback Theatre in the community. Significantly, a process such as this would demand a commitment to self-responsibility with a focus on others. This approach is similarly underpinned by the values that have emerged as fundamental to the Playback Theatre method in the study.

Transparent and accountable practice would be further strengthened through systemised practice reflection.

Reflective practice underpinned my engagement in this research as I continued to perform Playback Theatre. The research suggests that a systematic approach to practice reflection leads to conscious self-development of the Playback Theatre practitioner and fuels a motivation to invest further in the development of the Company and the broader community/city.

Individual practitioner reflection could interfere with the spontaneity required for performance and could be difficult to integrate if not undertaken as part of a thoughtful approach to development and reflection by the Company. A reflective practice opens the potential for a spirit of inquiry in Company processes and enables shared leadership with respect to thinking about Playback Theatre practice and the development of individuals and the Company as a whole. It can also lead to the development of the form and considered application of the form in new contexts, or a new application of the form in old contexts.

**8.4** **Recommendations for Future Research**

Throughout the concluding discussion I allude to a number of areas that invite future research. An immediate extension of this research would be the exploration of what maximises the worth of the one-off Playback Theatre event with the specified community context.

The study found that audience members experienced a change of heart about others and were affected by the multiple perspectives made explicit in the dual telling-enactment performances. There is scope for future research to explore the effect of participation in Playback Theatre on changes in social distance between people and the degree in which the sociometry of the group is altered. This research would extend the findings in this study that suggest Playback Theatre can overcome estrangement and could assist practitioners to better understand the usefulness of Playback Theatre for increasing tolerance and generating co-operative social environments.

Research considering the value of pre-production activities on the Playback Theatre performance could assist Companies to make decisions about where to invest human and financial resources for work in different contexts. The involvement of multiple stakeholders and the identification of overlooked stakeholders could lead to a better understanding of who to involve and how to involve them in the pre-production period of the Playback Theatre performance in specific contexts.

Another focus for future research is the barriers to participation or flow experiences that are reported in this study. This could yield additional insight into the requirement of conducting, music, and acting for maximising the Playback Theatre performance for participants.

I am particularly interested in the interaction between the socio-cultural histories of the Company and the context of the performance event and how one influences the other. This arises out of my observation about the content of the stories told during performances in the study. Reconciliation and refugee themes were the driving force behind two of the performances. The March and July Public Performances and the Pride performance also featured stories about indigenous identity, value conflict, war, race, belonging and home. Research to explore the relationship between the contexts and content of performances by a particular Company in relation to the composition of the Company is warranted. One question might be: as producer and conductor of performances how influential is my agenda in evoking the content? Previous theatre and narrative research with regard to community-performance events and the socio-cultural environment from which they arise inform this recommendation. Peter Brook (1989), for example, recommends theatre companies be international to maximise their capacity to respond to diversity in a community.

Finally, a useful research focus for the future could be the exploration of Playback Theatre in the refugee context. This research could consider a cluster of specific applications of Playback Theatre, for example, a discrete event for workers alongside various events for refugee and asylum seeker groups based on shared language, culture and/or ethnicity, and an event for the generic community. In this way, some of the particularities about this context may be addressed, in particular, audience members familiarity with the Playback Theatre method. If approached in a developmental way, these specific performance experiences could then be followed by a combined event with the various sub-groups coming together for an expanded community ritual. The study suggests that one-off performances in this context may not be appropriate. There is however useful information to recommend the production of public performances framed by the refugee context like that conducted during the research for Reconciliation.

**8.5** **Playback Theatre: A metaphor for community**

By way of concluding, I discuss the notion that the one-off community-based Playback Theatre event as a metaphor for community. Conceived as a public event, the one-off community-based Playback Theatre performance places an emphasis on local stories as a means of connection and building community. The immediacy of the storytelling performances and the dramatic transformations of them on stage provide multiple metaphors for experiences of community. There is a delicate alchemy that underpins the efficacy of the

Playback Theatre performance in the community. The amalgamation of improvised performance and public ritual precipitates an expansive environment for risk taking and for challenging the dominant social protocols in the community context. Risk is fundamental to improvised performance. In Playback Theatre this is combined with the ritual structure of the form to create disturbances in the social environment. Participants respond by either accepting or rejecting the challenge, and thus entering or resisting the liminal experience. The call to risk is responded to by audience participation and is reliant on individual agency. Numerous elements conspire to influence whether an audience member responds at any given time in the performance. The conductor has significant sway in how this is maximised, however they are not singularly responsible. Their sway is mediated by the counter-balance offered through the call to listening inherent in the Playback Theatre method.

Playback Theatre summons us to listen. Unlike the individual agency underpinning the necessary culture of risk taking the call to listen engenders collective action. The one-off community-based Playback Theatre performance is a counter-cultural social environment where people are encouraged to share stories. This requires spectators and Company members alike, to listen for what's being said, what's being shown, what's being asked for, and what's missing. In this way, the Playback Theatre method enables everyone to take responsibility for the telling spaces that are being shared. This generates a spirit of inquiry and curiosity about the other. The interaction between risking and listening requires a certain kind of sharing that represents an experience of community where Self and Other are juxtaposed. The *Self* is engaged as *I* anticipate and act, as *I* take up the offer to risk. The O*ther* is evoked by *my* interest in them and *my* commitment to listen. The risking-listening call and response provides a tangible process for overcoming the culture of separation that works against "the magic of interpersonal interactions" (Berman, 1990, p.341) in local communities. Playback Theatre opens a space where we can meet in our sameness and our difference and potentially rise above estrangement and judgement.

As an ephemeral experience of community, Playback Theatre offers a chance for audience members to see others in a different light and perhaps overcome estrangement by knowing and understanding more about them. The mutuality implicit in the form means that this may create reciprocal opportunities for seeing and coming to know more of the Other. These public reflexive acts promote insight, with audience members thinking about what they think and believe or, perhaps more significantly, discussing what they think and believe. Experiences that foster the erosion of social distance due to reflection, or as a result of discussion between individuals because of perceived difference, no matter how small or intangible, represent an opportunity for a community. This value was made explicit in the findings. At many of the performances in the study, a number of people referred to the importance of hearing the stories of the others, from bureaucrats hearing the stories of people with mental illness to older women hearing the stories of younger women. Through this, Playback Theatre as a one-off community-based event supports communities to consolidate what Rapapport (2000) calls community narratives. This might be a narrative that embodies the shared experience of the Playback Theatre performance *and* the stories told within the performance. Like an oral history that evokes the tradition and lore of the gathered audience, the one-off community-based Playback Theatre event elucidates multiple truths and celebrates the courage of the audience/community.
