# CHAPTER SEVEN: "Let's Watch!": Spectating and Integration

The act of seeing can transform the person who sees and cause us to see differently for the rest of our lives.

Rachel Naomi Remen (2000, p.88)

The shift to the more traditional audience role of spectator occurs at that time in the ritual when it becomes clear who the volunteer storyteller will be. At this stage, the audience members prepare to watch and listen to the storytelling performance and the improvised enactment. In the transition to reception as a spectator, audience members experience a different form of engagement. The distance afforded the audience members in this role enables them to receive and respond, and in some cases reflect, in the moment. The experiences of listening and watching are dialectical with each informing the other. The opportunity to watch the action, without the pressure of performing, enables audience members to engage more fully in the event and experience elements of connection to themselves and to others within a collective; experiences similar to what Turner (1969) terms communitas. Individuals' personal values and perceptions inform this connection. Scholars have written about this in terms of the way in which theatre audiences’ engagement is influenced and informed by their unique world views (see for example Bharucha, 1993, Carlson, 1996, Bennett, 1990). This is similar to claims made about experiences of ritual performance (see for example, Mock, 2000, Schechner, 1985, 1990, Turner 1969, 1982), and narrative (see Denzin, 1989, Frank, 1995, Bruner, 1986). Common across these social activities is that people receive, perceive and respond to what they see, hear and feel from their unique social, cultural, political and spiritual values and knowledge. These experiences are influenced by the immediacy or what Mock (2000) calls the "liveness" of the event (p.2) and by the centrality of personal story. In this chapter I present audience members' experiences of the one-off community-based Playback Theatre performance from their perspectives as spectator.

I revisit reflective distance and discuss how these integrative moments are expanded when audience members are free to sit back. I explore the various experiences of connection as identified by audience members and include specific experiences where audience members witness themselves in a story that is told and enacted by others. The dynamics and value of the after-show period as a time for integration is reported.

**7.1** **Connections made through Spectating**

When speaking about their experiences as spectators, a word that spectators have consistently used is *connection*. Audience members have used this word to refer to a number of different experiences that could also be described as feelings of empathy, identification, and/or catharsis as they have watched and listened. The interview and observational data show that in the dynamic spectator-participation relationship audience members experience connection to themselves and to others through the ideas expressed in the stories and through the 'humanity' embodied in the form. The idea of feeling or making a connection with another has emerged as audience members have spoken about their experiences of listening to particular stories and watching particular enactments. Audience members have also acknowledged little or no connection to a teller or their story. Data generally indicate that these experiences are not necessarily specific to listening to the performance of the teller or to watching the enactment of the story. Rather, they appeared to occur randomly and are dependent on what people have heard and felt during the telling of the story and what people have seen, heard or felt during the enactment.

**7.1.1 Revisiting Reflective Distance: The critical observer**

When the conductor signals that the volunteer teller for the next story has been identified, audience members experience a shift to spectator. This moves audience members to the more familiar audience role of (critical) observer. Unlike conventional theatre, spectators appear to have a stake in the success of the production of the story at Playback Theatre; first in the telling, then in the enactment. This finding concurs with what O'Toole & Lepp (2000) report about audiences of interactive theatre. In the previous chapter, I suggest that the activation of the reflective distance function is contingent on the idea that audience members may participate and therefore need to understand what is required of them. This may be intuitive but may also include emotional and cognitive understanding. When searching the transcripts for patterns with respect to reflective distance from the spectator role, it has become clear that audience members are constantly engaged in some form of critical activity in this role. For most, this is no longer fraught with tension of the reflective activity that has been prompted by the prospect of participation. It is a more phlegmatic process perhaps contained by the knowledge that their thinking will not be exposed. Another possibility is that they will not be required to make public their judgements, their thinking or the way in which they are engaging. As a spectator, audience members are freer to manage the unexpected responses often triggered by the way in which the ritual elements of the form have acted to undermine social protocols of the context.

**7.1.2 Connection through Shared Humanity**

A number of people have pointed to the ordinariness of human stories in the Playback Theatre form as central in evoking strong feelings in them. It is this focus on local or personal stories, claims van Erven (2001) that transforms community-based events into avenues for the

"sociocultural empowerment" of the participants (p.3). Informants have spoken about the Playback Theatre performance being 'real' in a way that suggests that it is novel and inspiring.

One view is that the Playback Theatre performance provides a place where real people tell 'real stories'. For instance:

It's the real stories, and meeting those people, that makes it a powerful experience.

We are not just case studies, we are living emotional experiences. If the person themselves can tell their story, it's going to have far more reaching effects than a CEO or a therapist! (Brett, DAW, L120).

Brett has attended the Disability Week performance. His comment highlights how Playback Theatre facilitates the movement of the personal story from the domain of the professional, in this case 'the therapist'. Frank (1995) claims that such a shift involves a "profound assumption of personal responsibility" (p.13). The rise of personal story has paralleled the post-modern move toward promoting self-responsibility. Brett's comment points to how counter cultural it is for personal stories to be shared between professionals and clients in public, a view that can again be explained using ritual theory (see for example Schechner, 1985, 1993, Turner, 1969, 1982, 1990). Brett suggests that the dominant paradigm, where professional distance is in relationship to client disclosure, has been subverted by the way in which social norms are upended by the ritual context of Playback Theatre.

The idea that Playback Theatre is about 'real people and real data' (MDA03, L25) has been discussed by audience members. The following comment infers that daring to show and tell 'the difficult' in life is part of what makes Playback Theatre potent:

There was a sense of relief in looking back. I could see people who were telling their stories, looking at that and they had the smile on their face, and I thought that was the most amazing part of that, that people could see the life in that too, in the difficult [side]. That was what was important for me. And the fact that it was real, people there were seeing their life being played in front of their eyes (Leda,

MDA03, L25).

Leda speaks of daring to focus on what is hard or what is felt. Implicit in her comment is that these are aspects of life that are not often shown or acknowledged. Theatre is a place to show what is difficult and what is felt. The way Playback Theatre holds a place for the expression of these often shunned or hidden dimensions of life contravenes the distancing that theatre provides through the fictional frame and the fourth wall. Instead Playback Theatre privileges personal story and through the maintenance of what Turner (1982) calls the ritual process frees people up to take risks and express these often overlooked aspects of human endeavour. Audience members suggest that placing emotional response at the forefront of the discussion about an issue has resulted in their feeling connected and has led to their acknowledgement of each other's humanity. For instance:

The beauty of Playback Theatre - or that which I saw - was that it focused on feelings. [People don’t understand] the refugee life experiences, because the refugee experience is so different to many Australian's life experience. People remain detached and simply can't understand or see relevance in terms of their own lives. The great thing about your Playback Theatre was that it really focussed on emotion – sitting in the audience it was impossible for me not to feel moved.

Yes, my life journey and story is different – but I have experienced at one time or another all of the emotions that came out of people's stories – anxiety, fear, loneliness, disbelief, happiness, sense of security, political awakening – thus I felt really connected and better able to understand (Mercy, MDA11, L12).

Speaking about the Refugee Week performance, Mercy acknowledges her appreciation of privileging feelings in an event for people who work with feelings all day long. The Refugee Week audience identifies as a community of interest or what Checkoway (1995) calls a community of collective action. Mercy is perhaps suggesting that the Playback Theatre performance has provided an experience for collective emotional expression, something that Giddens (1990) proposes is an experience of community. Her comment infers that this is important; a view that supports claims made by Hoggett and Miller (in Burkett, 2003) who demand that emotions be recognised as central to any work within human communities.

Mercy's comment is an example of how audience members may distance themselves in the Playback Theatre performance to assess or sum up what they feel is happening for the collective. She describes the way in which she has identified with many of the emotions presented throughout the Refugee Week performance, and extrapolates this to conclude that it has been a good thing. For her, she has felt 'better able to understand' and acknowledges a shift in her perspective. Bundy (2003) argues that it is through emotional engagement that audience members experience a change in their understanding. In her comment Mercy implies that others have also had their perspectives changed. Other interview data confirm this (see for example MDA 03, 04, 09,10, 12, 13, 14, & 15). Gaylord (in Bennett, 1990) identifies that it is the ritual frame in the theatre event that generates the conditions for this kind of collective reflexivity.

**7.1.3 Connection through the Ideas Expressed in a Story**

Informants readily discussed the idea that the enactment represents the actors' interpretation, a finding that aligns with Nicholson and Taylor (1998) who assert that such interpretation is informed by personal experiences. Audience members suggest that the interpretive enactment provides a different perspective to that of the teller. This concurs with Brook's (1989) claim about theatre's potential to replace "a single point of view by a multitude of different visions" (p.115). This could be further understood in terms of what Coppieters (in Bennett, 1990) proffers when he suggests that perceptual processes in the theatre are a form of social interaction. Just as actors play stories back based on their interpretation of what they heard, audience members watch and listen to the enactment from their unique interpretive frame.

This means that the enactment represents an alternative telling to the one they have already heard. Using the example of Liam's story, this section proposes that Playback Theatre has facilitated connection through identification with the teller, identification with other characters in the story, empathy with the teller or empathy with others in the story.

It was Liam's first night at a Playback Theatre performance (Mar03, L104). He has come to the stage as the final teller during the March Public Performance. His story recounts a time when he was away overseas, earning money in an apple orchard in order to provide for his expectant child. He was called home early, when at just 20 weeks gestation the baby was to be born. She did not survive. I have watched from the stage, cast in the role of his girlfriend's mother. He leaned forward and told of his experience of naming his daughter and preparing for her funeral. He wished for her to be placed in the forest, somewhere beautiful and natural. His girlfriend's mother challenged this. He insisted and eventually his baby was buried as he wished. The enactment has ended with me, in role, drawing the actor playing Liam forward.

Standing downstage centre, facing each other he said, 'This is how I want it to be'. As his mother-in-law, I have stepped aside. This has signaled the completion of the enactment. The music swells and we freeze the scene and look toward Liam in the ritual acknowledgement of the teller. Seated downstage right, Liam has looked toward us for some moments, nodding.

Co-observer, Rebecca has watched from the audience. As the telling and enactment proceeded, she has juggled her memories about birth and death. Her response to Liam's has been captured in a fluid sculpture - admiration and awe at his graciousness. Later she reports: I really felt a strong connection with Liam through hearing his story …I felt compelled to talk to him after the performance … I was affected by Liam's acceptance of it and I found myself thinking, 'you came to accept this a whole lot sooner than I did (my sister's death).' And the baby bit, that's sort of where we're

(my husband and I are) at with things at the moment, and seeing how fatherhood affected him (Liam) was of interest to me, to see this man with such courage sharing such a deeply emotional story (Rebecca, OD0b, L69).

From role as an actor and participant observer, I have felt that it was the conflict over the burial that brought Liam to the teller's chair. Rebecca's focus has been on what she saw as Liam's coming to terms with the death of the baby and with the idea of what having a baby can mean for a man - her husband. From her position in the audience, Dawn's61 response is different again. The following excerpt suggests that she has transformed the idea of an actual baby to represent her 'dream of a baby'.

During Liam's telling, I thought about us62 trying to have a baby and that it never happened. How our dream of having a baby had to be put to rest. It affected me and I thought, 'I don't really want to go there' … I felt like it (Liam's experience) was similar to what we've had to do. I've had to put this (dream) to bed, to bury it (Dawn, OD0b, L237)

61 Dawn was also co-observing at this performance. We had agreed that she would focus on the audience responses as much as possible as this was early in the research and we were still establishing the strengths and limitations of participant observation at Playback Theatre. She had not anticipated being so affected by the stories.

62 Dawn is referring to her and my efforts to have children.

In this example, the audience members express that the connection occurred as they witnessed the telling of the story, with both Rebecca and Dawn stating that their experience of the enactment was overshadowed by their experience of witnessing Liam in his telling. As Sayre (1989) argues, the storytelling ritual unites teller and audience in a cognitive, as opposed to social way. As listeners, Rebecca and Dawn have invested Liam's story with significance that makes sense to them. In Shuman's (1986) terms, Liam's story has assisted them to categorise their experiences. In light of what Frank (1995) writes Liam's stepping forward could be described as an ethical act that engenders communion. In witnessing Liam's act, Dawn and Rebecca have each had a momentary or spontaneous connection. Turner (1969) suggests that spontaneous communitas occurs outside the domain of the societal structure. Liam's story broaches the often taboo subject of death, but perhaps more counter-cultural is the fact that he is a man speaking about his values in relation to the disposal of his tiny infant daughter's body. The 'death' has been a moment of connection for Rebecca. It has enabled her to express her feelings about the death, more than ten years ago, of her 15-year-old sister. She admits that seeing Liam in his graciousness has assisted her to acknowledge that she felt much less gracious than he. Meanwhile for Dawn it is the 'burial' of a 'baby' that has resonated with her experience. This moment enables her to speak of her recent acceptance of not having children, again a subject that is often overlooked in light of the more joyous topic of having them.

Later in the chapter I examine a storytelling episode in which audience members did not experience a connection while listening and where a spontaneous and surprising connection came as a result of watching the enactment. Next, I report on audience members' perceptions about the enactments that are produced by the actors and musician in response to tellers' personal stories.

**7.1.4 Enactment: Truth or dare**

Informants' comments suggest that Playback Theatre's participatory interactive style acts to facilitate an experience of performance that is fresh and surprising for many audience members. A consistently surprising experience for audience members has been the transformation of the verbal narrative to dramatic form. After storytellers recount their personal tales, the conductor invokes the ritual phrase 'Let's watch.' This phrase, when delivered, signals to the audience that a heightened state of theatrical performance will follow and covertly requests that audience members suspend reality and join the actors in creating theatre. Observation data captures the shift in the following comment. 'They were looking at [the teller]. Once it was finished and you said, 'Lets watch' everyone was intent on looking at the stage' (Dawn, OD01, L224). On this cue, the musician's task is to enlarge the ritual space of the stage, using music to charm and mystify in the ritual beginning of the stylised action. Informants have made little comment about the place and power of music in the enactment, suggesting that they are engaged beyond it or took it and its function in altering the ritual space for granted. Beyond the telling and the story content, the enactment is the other significant way in which audience members engage in the Playback Theatre performances. Audience engagement is related to both what and how the actors produced the story they had just heard. Data suggest that at some point in the enactment, audience members find themselves in a suspended state of reality, as if watching (or hearing) the story for the first time. Informants suggest that the enactment is necessarily interpretive, gives breath and depth to the verbal narratives and provides a different perspective.

Participants have expressed the view that the enactment 'caught the essence' (Rec03, L162) and has made stories 'real' (MHW03, L10). In some instances, the enactment has been seen to make something out of nothing, rendering a teller's experience more 'alive' on stage. One audience member states:

You made the story come alive and it was about 'nothing' it seems, but it made me recall the times when I was a teenager talking on the phone for ages about nothing!

(Tamara, Jul01, L71).

Tamara's comment suggests that while she has felt little connection to the story or storyteller the enactment has contained meaning for her. She says that in recalling her own memory, the performance became meaningful or 'alive'. This finding aligns with what Hosking proposes is the purpose of the Playback Theatre enactment (Hosking & Penny, 2002, 2003). Perhaps it is Tamara that comes 'alive' as she watches the enactment. A number of audience members have made comments that suggest they have experienced the enactment as giving substance to stories that they had initially found difficult to engage with as listeners. This is explored further in the section entitled *Lack of Connection.*

Various views have been expressed that indicate that the enactment expands the audience members' and the tellers' experience of the storytelling performance. One view is that the enactment illuminates aspects of the story and broadens it (Rec01, L23). Another view is that the enactment offers a different perspective to that which the listener has initially formed about the story (Jul05, L62). The enactment is seen as an interpretation, not exactly word-for-word but where the actors bring their own personal perspective to the stage (Jul05, L344). Another view positions the enactment as a reflection where the 'actors capture something the teller may not have realised' and the tellers see this and add it to their understanding of the experience (DAW07, 07). This function of the enactment to provide multiple perspectives is contained in the way it has been produced. Each enactment represents a convergence of what four or five actors have heard and reproduced in the context of the performance. This aligns with Brook's (1989) assertion that theatre can accomplish a hologram of interacting perspectives. It concurs with Denzin's (1989) claim that no story is an individual production. He asserts that it is in the action of the listener interpreting that the story exists. Following his suggestion, it is probable that as each actor listens, they undergo a dynamic process of unpacking the relationship between what they hear in the story: the incidents, the context, the characters and the teller's interpretations implicit in the narrative performance. They then undergo a process of storing and recalling the details in the story that will make sense as a piece of theatre: where the story took place, who was there, what happened. They then work in an improvised way with an ensemble of actors who have each simultaneously undergone the same process of listening, interpreting and re-producing. Thus, while Bauman (1986) claims that stories embody the tellers' points-of-view, the Playback Theatre enactment embodies a conglomerate of the different interpretations of the actors from their various points-of-view. On watching the enactment the audience members overlay what they witness with the interpretation they made as they have listened to the story.

Audience members suggest that the Playback Theatre enactment does not require accuracy.

For instance:

They tuned into what was important … It didn't matter that it wasn't exactly the narrative, it was an authentic recreation of the mood or the emotion, very authentic … The actor did [my friend] a bit different but still got her, if he did her more outrageous it would have been more satisfying for me but it was OK, I loved it, I saw something new (Tamara, Jul05, L218, L361 & Jul01, L16).

Tamara's generosity in accepting the best effort of the actor is not unusual in theatre. During a reflective dialogue I comment on the way audience members appear to 'take the players on board as one of them. They seem concerned that they won't fail and that they'll be able to pull it off' (OD02, L38). Masterson (2004) suggests that audience members want the actors to succeed. Hosking & Penny (2003) remind us that part of the theatre of Playback Theatre is that it is somewhat imperfect. Despite the lack of accuracy, Tamara has engaged as a spectator enjoyed the theatre and has seen her story in a new light. For Helen, it has been the accuracy in the pitch of her emotional experience that has rendered the Playback Theatre enactment potent. She says:

I remember [the actor] talking about 'wringing his neck'. And that was right. It was like, 'ooo! Yes!' That's not what I said but that's how I felt. It sort of got it (Helen,

Rec07, L78).

Tamara and Helen highlight the ways in which the enactments have missed the mark with their stories. This suggests that audience members are seeing the actors in a certain light: as fellow human beings doing their best, perhaps. This generosity can be considered within Turner's (1969) conception of communitas as an embodied experience. He suggests that communitas arises in instant mutuality, involving the whole person in relation to others – the complete actor in relation to the complete spectator, for example – "when each person fully experiences being the other" (p.136). Audience members like Tamara and Helen *see* the human actor, and in so doing *see* the human effort and perhaps, *see* themselves. Supporting data for this emerged from the numerous times audience members have inquired about how to join the Playback Theatre Company or where they could do Playback Theatre suggesting that they have been reversing roles with the actors, and imagining themselves on stage.

While the tellers and the audience have appeared to be very accepting of the actors'

interpretive efforts there were times when the actors' socio-cultural lenses or prior knowledge skewed the enactment. I will illustrate this with Liam's story from the March Public performance. As reported earlier Liam's story encompassed the passing of his infant daughter and his determination to effect the ritual of her burial. While the baby's birth and death are closely linked, the period leading up to the baby's birth seemed to dominate the staging of the story with the actor cast as Liam seeming non-existent. After being on stage as an actor, I experienced residual concerns about the dominant focus in the enactment, yet felt resolved that we had captured the essential moment where Liam had asserted himself with his mother-in-law. Observation data suggest that the birthing scene had been dominant and that Liam's 'angst' had not been well represented. Rebecca identifies what she has felt is missing for her.

She says:

He made some comment about 'she was only here for an hour' I had this yearning to see something about the connection from the afterlife or the sense that she was still with him (OD01b, L146).

Dawn agrees that the relationship between Liam and the baby had not been adequately evoked on stage. She adds, 'Even though she (the baby) was there for such a short time, his memory of her is something that he will keep with him forever' (OD01b, L177). Four women had created the enactment. One actor had prior knowledge of the story due to her friendship with the young couple. The other two actors had heard the story of the pregnancy at a Playback Theatre performance twelve months earlier. It is likely that these elements have converged on stage to obscure what Rebecca and Dawn have nominated as the essential elements in the story based on listening to Liam. It is also possible that in constructing the enactment the actors may have veered away from the difficult subject of death. I discuss the way in which enactments can fail to represent essential emotional aspects of a story later in the chapter through Lorraine's story at the Reconciliation performance.

Some audience members have claimed that the verbal narrative can be hard to follow or inaccessible. The following comment suggests that the enactment can make the verbal narrative more accessible.

Sometimes people don't communicate their story very well, and when you see it on stage you can see what was going on for the person, even though you didn’t quite get it from what they had said (Sarah, Pride02, L20).

It is likely that the teller that Sarah is referring to is similar to the one Frank (1995) writes about when he says that tellers can tell around stories. Whereas, Shuman (1986) discusses the nature of stories as an account of a personal experience, a bounded unit with a beginning middle and end. Either way, data from the study indicate that there are times in the Playback Theatre ritual when audience members have found that they do not connect with a teller or with the story, or in some cases can not make sense of the story as they listen to the teller. This has sometimes led to audience members making inaccurate judgements about the teller, and perhaps turning away from them. Yet the same audience members report that they have felt a connection to the ideas expressed in the story when they have watched the enactment.

Thus while the verbal telling performance has initiated the potential alienation of the teller, the enactment has then facilitated a bridge across the perceived difference. This phenomenon is discussed in the following section.

**7.1.5 Lack of Connection or Connection Regained through Witnessing Enactment** Shuman (1986) discusses the role of the listener in the storytelling ritual. She claims that the listener is required to "unpack" the details in the tale (p.21). From my observations, audience members at the Playback Theatre performances have made a conscious and deliberate effort to listen, as if, in Razack (1993) terms, people feel a moral obligation to do so. As demonstrated above, Dawn and Rebecca have shared what Frank (1995) calls a mutual moment of witness as they have listened to Liam. There are also times during the Playback Theatre performance when audience members find listening a challenge and feel no connection with the teller. This is explored here using Kylie's story.

Kylie came to the stage to tell the final story at the Reconciliation performance. As she has approached the stage, I assumed by her behaviour that she was nervous. Later she reports that her stories had been building all through the show and that she had so much to say. Her story evoked the neighbourhood of her childhood: the 'wrong-side of the tracks' where she played freely with aboriginal children. As she grew older she became conscious of a contradiction in values in her family with regard to aborigines; a situation she has come to understand as racism. Toward what I thought was the end of her telling, I have asked her to nominate a family member. She chose to cast her grandfather. Her story ends with a difficult confrontation with him. On the night she revealed, 'I wanted to challenge him but I wanted to respect my elders' (Rec TV1, LL487-580). In my role as conductor I have sensed that this is an end to her story. I have also sensed that she is still bubbling with a need to speak. I have chosen to pause while she has made a number of statements about her conviction to challenge herself and others about prejudice and racism toward indigenous Australians. A passion or force has imbued her delivery. In a reflective dialogue I state that it was as if she was

'interrupting her own story to make comments about other stories from the evening' (OD06,

L1478).

The style and length of Kylie's telling has drawn a number of responses from the audience. As

I state above, during the telling I am committed to facilitating Kylie's full expression of the passion she clearly felt. During her telling, I have become aware of what I perceived as restlessness in the audience. Both co-observers confirm this observation. I include Craig's description below:

[D]uring the telling of the story there was movement in the audience because it went on for so long and the momentum was lost. She didn't make a connection with the audience. She was too wound up in her own story, and I thought she was too self-indulgent. I don't think it was about the length of time they've had to sit there because I thought we could have gone on for another hour in the performance. So it wasn't, 'it's time to go, it's been an hour and a half and I've got to do other things', because I think the audience were there to do more, and to have more. I think they got bored of her (Craig, OD01, L618).

This restlessness in the audience has been generalised and there have been comments made about being 'confused' by the telling (Rec13, L14) and annoyed by the teller (OD01, L687).

Others have expressed that they have felt some impatience with her. Of note is the way in which audience participants have transformed their responses to her as they found ways to connect with the ideas in her story through the enactment. Interestingly, all the audience participants who have voluntarily commented on this story are young women of a similar age.

The following excerpt is from Louella:

At the beginning, I was thinking, 'Get on with it!' But when the story was done (enacted), for me personally, I went 'yes! I can relate to that.' But I didn't even know what the story was about when she was telling it. The playback made it clear to me, and then it had total connection to me. I remember feeling like that when I was a lot younger. I remember thinking 'what am I supposed to think.' I didn't relate to her as a person, but once that playback (happened) I could (relate). I was thinking, 'I used to feel like that; am I suppose to think what Mum thinks or what Dad thinks?' It was about finding a sense of who I was. When I watch the playback it showed: 'I'll think how *I* feel.' Afterwards, I was thinking that I felt exactly like what they played up there (on stage) when I was leaving home – and when I was forming thoughts about what I did and didn't think – being stuck in the middle between what my family thought and what I felt really deep down (Louella, OD01, L649).

Louella has been able to connect with the ideas presented in the story through the dramatic enactment of the relationship between the young woman and her grandfather. Even though she has difficulty initially she has *wanted* to listen to Kylie. This act of "listening for the other", Frank (1995) claims, stimulates us to "listen for ourself." He suggests that in this "moment of witness," the story "crystallizes a mutuality of need, when each is for the other" (p.25). In her effort to listen Louella has re-encountered her own experience. Eloise similarly has found herself becoming disinterested as Kylie told her story. Her disinterest has been transformed toward the end of enactment. Eloise has been struck by the encounter between the younger woman and the older man brought to life on stage, at this point the story has become more vivid for her. It has intersected with her own, particularly 'the racism of the older man'. She explains:

My father's Italian and one time we got into a huge fight on public transport

(laughs). Basically, he was making a lot of racist comments, and I asked him to shut up and he didn't take it too well. I tried to explain that I wouldn't stand for racism because he's my father and he's Italian (laughs) and he couldn't understand that (.)

(teary). I think my story came up just before the last story about the girl and her grandfather (Eloise, Rec01.L139).

Co-observing and seated behind Eloise and her friends, Dawn has noticed her response. In the proceeding reflective discussion she makes the following comment:

I think [Eloise] identified with the story, because she was shedding a few tears and I remember looking there and thinking, 'what is she crying about?' The story had nothing for me, and at that point I was surprised that she was upset (Dawn, OD01, L677).

Dawn's observation of Eloise has expanded her own experience and led her to consider the different ways people connect to stories.

This set of findings demonstrates the way in which audience members have been engaged in a collective effort to listen to the storyteller, and in wanting to *hear* her. This is a fundamental expectation of theatre: that audience members and performers listen. Carter (1992) suggests that listening requires us to move beyond our ears, and look beyond our eyes to listen with our whole body. He writes of the body as "a trembling flame, a vibrating surface … [that]

does not photograph the world, but filters it across permeable membranes" (p.129). The examples above suggest that this level of listening could be facilitated via the enactment in Playback Theatre. Thus, the difficulty these selected audience members have in listening to Kylie's verbal performance may be understood using Waitzen's (in Frank, 1995) idea that we tend to interrupt stories when we become uncomfortable. In this way we are able to silence the telling or turn stories away from their truths. In the excerpts above, the young women have admitted that the story embodied something of their truth, and so they may have found it too hard to hear. Interrupting the Playback Theatre ritual might present too great a breach of the collective contract. Instead, they interrupt metaphorically through withdrawing and experiencing a break in flow. The interpretation of Kylie's story by the actors could be said to be a fictive retelling, providing some distance from the truth. This has enabled the young women who are initially distanced by the telling to turn back toward both the truth in the story and to the teller herself. In some ways, watching the enactment has facilitated the stories of Eloise and Louella to become present to them by "invading their consciousness from the outside" (Sayre, 1989, p.209). Then, as Gaylord (in Bennett, 1990) suggests, the performance has become a site of reflexivity where together, performers, spectators and teller have found meaning and significance in the events on stage.

During the course of the study there have been audience members who have failed to find a point of connection, or perhaps have found that they could not hear the content of the story through either the telling-performance or the enactment. Helen explains away her lack of connection by suggesting that there might have been a generation gap.

I was kind of a bit disappointed. I can't remember all the stories now and I'm not being critical because each story is important but it wasn't as satisfying to me. … I was conscious that there were more the young people there and the stories seemed kind of lighter, not deeper. So I thought, 'there's a generation gap here. There could be depth in those stories that I just can't see because I'm from a different generation (Helen, Rec08, L150).

Helen admits to no sense of connection to what she has perceived as stories about being young, she nevertheless engages in reflection about what is missing for her. This suggests that rather than there being no connection at all, Helen does not experience the emotional connection that Bundy (2003) proposes is central to audience engagement in theatre.

Emotional engagement occurs along a continuum from complete sympathetic identification to complete detachment. Bundy claims that emotional engagement is necessary if a new understanding or awareness is to develop for spectators. Lack of emotional engagement can inhibit the audience member entering more fully into the aesthetic frame (Bundy, 2003). This has been spoken about as a lack of connection, with audience members concluding that a lack or paucity in the form or in the theatricality of the event has been to blame. For instance: It was also dull. I expected a more polished production. I wanted a more colourful production. I wanted to see a variety of things (styles), there are many things you can draw on to make polished theatre (Rhys, Rec12, L08).

In my observation notes I have written that I was particularly keen to interview audience members whose comments have focused on critical feedback about the artistry of the performance. For the greater part audience members have been particularly positive about the skills of the performers and appreciative of the performance as theatre. For instance: I was aware that there is much more at play than you realise. You have all the senses. What the actors hear, they hear more than words. … [I] reflected on the wonder of it. … It's magic before your eyes, like seeing a spirit or an essence in front of you (Jackie, Pride04, L76, 81).

This aligns with what Masterson (2004) suggests, that audience members are actively invested in the performers succeeding. O'Toole and Lepp (2000) suggest that this is natural in participative forms of theatre where audience members have a pivotal role in what happens next. In fact, I have observed that audience members who are unhappy or disappointed by the level of artistry have offered a number of recommendations on ways to create a more polished production, as Rhys does above (see also,Rec05, L427). However, unlike Rhys, others have added a statement of qualification that has inferred that they are not displeased with their experience of the performance, they just want the theatre to be better somehow. For example:

I thought, 'How can someone within 10 minutes of listening to someone’s tragic story reinterpret it? The acting really annoyed me. It was repetitive, all very literal.

The characters were the same, the ideas were repeated, but the heart was there. I found myself cringing a bit at the similarities: like the use of scarves, this was so predictable, I knew they were going to grab the scarves. … The gentleman actor always had the same role – hand on shoulder. At the same time I think it’s a great idea, it has good intention. Something positive. I am glad I went, it made me stop and think how good my life is and how good Australia is (Sharon, MDA15, L14).

Sharon's comments demonstrate how she has taken up the offer implicit in the Playback Theatre form to become what Bennett (1990) names "a tangible creator of the theatrical event" (p.10). Her comment reveals that the experience has engaged her beyond the artistic criticism where she has felt a connection with the content of the stories that has made her 'think how good my life is'. Identifying this pattern in the transcripts where audience members have maintained reflective (critical) distance as their main position of engagement has led me to question whether these audience members actually enter the liminal activity at all. I argue earlier that while Turner (1982) suggests that a reflective stance can block an experience of flow, Meyerhoff (1990) asserts that the audience member can simultaneously experience (reflective) awareness while engaged in the flow experience. For audience members like Sharon, it appears that their experience of the Playback Theatre event is mostly from this distanced place. This is not dissimilar to Clare's experience discussed in the previous chapter which presents Clare's process of working out what is required of her in order for her to participate. However, Sharon adds her knowledge, expertise and expectations of an artistic event to the list of things she has to reconcile before she is free to enter the liminal zone. For Rhys, it appears unlikely that he has had an experience of flow or communitas.

In this section I have focused on the enactment as a point of connection for audience members if they have experienced confusion in listening to the teller. I have presented an example that revealed that the enactment might also fail to engage audience members, particularly those who are critical of the artistic dimension of Playback Theatre in the performance. Next, I illustrate the experience of audience members who experience a connection to the ideas that are present in the telling of the story with a heightened or strengthened connection gained through watching the enactment.

**7.1.6 Heightened Connection**

Here I draw on excerpts and comments made after the Mental Health Week performance to discuss the way in which audience members who have experienced a connection to a story have that experience heightened when watching the enactment. The excerpts and comments relate to Hillary and the story that she has told during the performance. Hillary came to the stage to share a story about her experience of juggling her commitment to care for her brother who has schizophrenia with that of her marriage relationship to Larry. She recounted the tension she had felt each night when her husband's very public support of her care of her brother turned into private complaints and condemnation of him, behaviour she termed 'pillow talk'. Her husband then fell ill, at which point her inner conflict about the pillow talk escalated. As the story progressed, she has expressed how she had remained committed to her relationship with her brother as she cared for her sick husband.

Hillary's story is what Frank (1995) calls a "self/*other"* story (p.131). In a post-show interview, she says that she elected to tell this particular story so that she could speak about her experience of Larry and the 'pillow talk' (MHW06, L55). This specific idea – 'pillow talk' – has resonated with many people in the audience. After the performance a number of people have approached her. Some have identified with her experience of caring and feeling overburdened. Others have identified with Larry's behaviour, and his treatment or lack of support of her as primary carer. She describes the after-show interactions:

I had so much feedback on that 'pillow talk' and from the partner too. They were saying, 'I didn't know I gave her such a hard time about being a carer. I will think more about pillowtalk in the future'.

Women carers were saying yeah, 'I know what you mean about the 'pillowtalk' and sometimes it really hurts, and you can't discuss it because they don't want to have any part of it. And (they were saying) what do you do for yourself, with the things that you want to talk about? (Hillary, MHW04, L290).

Embedded in Hillary's story are what Wolff (in Bennett, 1990) terms socially formed cultural values and personal ideas. As Bruner (1986) reports, these values and ideas acted to influence the experience of many audience members. The story and enactment has made explicit various aspects of the social system of the mental health community who had gathered at the Playback Theatre event (Bruner, 1986). The widespread nature of the responses to Hillary's story indicate that it may have been a close representation of their social system (Handelman, 1990).

The way in which Hillary's role of care provider has been positioned between the needs of the two men resonated strongly with Alice. She reports that as she has listened to Hillary's story she has experienced a connection to Hillary around the lifestyle the story explicated and she became interested in connecting to others that might have similar experiences. She says: That was exactly my story. I didn't know her story, and I thought, 'oh my god!

Somebody else had two people in her life too - the tug of war, the relationship, the ill person.' It was amazing. If Hil's been through it and I've been through it, there must be others. It's like it became real, not just a discussion (Alice, MHW03, L4)

In the excerpt below Alice refers to an image that had been created on stage where the actor who had been portraying Hillary was entwined by the two actors playing her husband and brother, and was being pulled back and forward between them. In the role of Hillary, the actor has said, 'if only I could care *enough*'. She speaks about watching the enactment:

Seeing the actors pulling different ways, that was me. It gave a real extra dimension that you can't see just from talking … Another thing someone said, 'if only I could care enough, they'll get better,' I haven't forgotten that - that was really important,

really powerful for me that sentence. I couldn't say it but I thought, 'that's me.' I

overburden myself with caring, trying to make it all better (MHW03, L39, L51).

This comment suggests that Alice has identified with the idea of being pulled by opposite forces and the idea that it was in her capacity to 'care' that could create a change for the better. Seeing the image of herself represented on stage through Hillary's story has enabled Alice to acknowledge her situation and accept something about how she behaves in that situation.

Images that are captured during performances create a strong link for some (OD0b, L313). Frank (1995) suggests that those who tell their personal stories are witnesses for others who may not have the voice or the courage to tell. Alice's strong identification suggests that she has felt as if she has told *her* story. This phenomenon of feeling as if someone's story is your own in some way has also emerged in situations where there has been almost no similarity in the content and context of the story being told to that of the story of the audience member who has felt connected. One example of this (for other examples see Rec04, L83, Jul01, L57) has occurred during the Refugee Week performance where a young girl came to the stage to tell her story. She has recounted how her family had been separated in preparation for fleeing Iraq. She has spoken about her journey with her mother and sister out of Iraq, through Bangladesh to Indonesia, and finally to Christmas Island. Her story has ended with being 'welcomed' by Australia. While the separation of the girl from her father has been given little attention in the telling and in the enactment, one audience member has been strongly affected by this part of the story. After watching the enactment, she has recalled her relationship with her father and has expressed sadness about being separated from him as an adult (MDA07, L39).

After-show discussion groups have generated various conversations that indicate audience members' experience some connection in response to the actors' improvising on stage. For instance:

For me, on each re-enactment I just felt amazed by the linkages that they created. I felt great confidence, each person (the actors), I thought just picked up beautifully, and I loved the way that they just blended and obviously had so much confidence in each other. It was just a terrific connection of people and certainly for me in the audience I felt tremendously connected to them (Patty, Rec03, L168).

Witnessing the actors working together to create theatre has engaged Patty. Salas (1993, 1999) writes about the potency of Playback Theatre being contingent on the actors' commitment to standing on stage and being present as people share their stories. Patty's experience appears to be linked strongly to her witnessing of the actors' teamwork when improvising the scenes. This links with what Wolff (in Bennett, 1990) asserts regarding the complex connection and interaction between the theatre audience and the social systems (implicit here in the Playback

Theatre form) as they relate to contemporary culture. The idea that audience members get to see the Playback Theatre actors create the work is somewhat counter cultural in terms of what might be expected at a theatre event. Observation data suggest that the breaking of conventional theatre norms contributes to the theatricality of the event. Craig comments that 'the simplicity of [the conductor] walking down into the audience had a profound effect' (Craig, OD1, L53). This is too much for some. While Patty has enjoyed seeing through the fourth wall as the actors collaborate with each other, the teller and the audience, some audience members have been far from appreciative of what they have seen and have wanted more 'polish' (Rec12, L08).

In this section I have presented various findings, illustrated by a selection of data, of ways audience members have made connections to each other, to themselves, and to the social and broader context during the Playback Theatre performance. I now discuss audience members' collective experiences of feeling connected and making connections in Playback Theatre.

**7.2** **Collective Experience**

One informant states that 'you can make all these connections with people, just being at a Playback Theatre together' (Brett, DAW, L53). The community-based situated-ness of the Playback Theatre performances in this study has enabled a collective experience for audiences that identify as a community of interest. Some audience members have spoken about the benefits of sharing in the Playback Theatre experience. One claims that this sharing has added to what Rapapport (2000) calls the shared narrative of the community. Attending the Playback Theatre performance has been seen as a significant experience in collective connection for Lynette who initiated the Mental Health Week performance. She states:

The really important part of what playback does is to create the shared experience,

that connects people, and I think one of the really valuable things is when a community of people are concerned about what's happened. … So [in being together at the Playback Theatre performance] already something's happened

(Lynette, MHW04, L1164).

Lynette is suggesting that the shared experience in her community has acted to develop what Marra James (in Bellah et al. 1985) calls a community of memory. Further, Lynette nominates a specific outcome for the community through the sharing of this experience. She suggests that hearing Hillary's particular story63 'gave people permission' to approach her and the other community member implicated in the story, Hillary's brother, Nathaniel. Lynette proposes that this permission has liberated people in their social responsibility and has enabled them to challenge social protocols that usually persuade them to look the other way. She says: It's a little opening for a community and people who were there are the people who were there, like [they can say to each other] 'were you at the opening?' Did you see the playback performance?' There's this shared history, [through] the stories that were there (Lynette, MHW, L1139).

The layering effect of the experience of hearing and seeing the story and of acting on the permission evoked by the story in approaching Hillary can be understood in terms of Kershaw's idea. He suggests that when a group of people share an experience of theatre ripples of the performance are "multiplied by more than the audience number" within the broader community (in Elam, 1996, p.30). Elam (1996) commends the application of theatre in the community for this very reason when he says that it serves to build connections into the wider cultural and social community through shared individual responses.

This idea of collective experience has been slightly different for audience members at the Pride performance, some of whom have repeatedly attended the event over the previous eight years. Jackie comments on the presence of a baby and his family as an example of this: It was lovely continuity that [couple with the children] were there. I remember when [their first child] was a baby and now [the second baby has] come along - it was full circle … It made me look at us, look at what we're all doing now … It's very special - it's a great Pride event, we get nothing else like it. I love introducing other women to it too. How uplifting it is to spend time with women like that, and that given the space something always comes. [For me,] this (Playback Theatre) is a way of making family outside the traditional (Jackie, Pride04, L45).

63 This is discussed in more detail earlier in the chapter.

Jackie's experience relates to a specific experience of Playback Theatre in a specific context.

While the shared experience has particular meaning because of this specificity, interviews suggest that audience members can feel less ease due to over familiarity and lack of anonymity.

The impact of self-revelation in audiences where there are previous relationships has also emerged at events where people are present with work colleagues, and when people are present in work personaes alongside their clients and the general public.

**7.3** **Watching Self**

As discussed earlier in the chapter, for some audience members listening to and watching enactments of stories by others is like seeing a version of their own story. From the interviews I have discovered that the experience of watching yourself actually occurs in two specific ways. One is when the storyteller watches the enactment in which they have cast themselves. The second is when someone in the audience has been featured in a story that has been told and cast by another person. It is the various experiences arising from these two situations that are discussed here.

**7.3.1 Watching self: stories told by self**

Carlson (1996) proposes that in the performative moment we are able to witness ourselves in the living and gain insight and connection. Tellers have spoke freely about their experiences of watching the enactment of their story. Just as other audience members have acknowledged how the enactment has offered them a different perspective, so too did tellers (Jul05, L3). Seeing the story played-back has enabled tellers to 'pull it apart and see different aspects of it' (Rec01, L1148). This equates with Guss's (2001) suggestion that the reflective properties of performance enables us to show ourselves to ourselves with the chance that we will become more conscious "as we see ourselves" (p.158). Tamara describes it as offering her an opportunity to see her experience anew:

I saw something new. They pulled out the homesickness, and that was why I had requested Australian music. I had not realised I was so homesick - and Paula also -

that's why we connected so strongly. They (the actors) could see that in the story without me actually saying it, and I hadn't seen that [I was homesick] so that was something new, and they added in the painting, and gave it more sense, some of the missing pieces. That's probably what made us click, Paula and me, we really clicked because we were really homesick (Tamara, Jul01, L18).

For Tamara, the story has represented her life and experience. The experience of seeing the enactment has revealed to her that which had been previously "covered up." This experience aligns with what Denzin (1989) says about telling stories: that it is like painting over pictures "and, when the paint is scraped off an old picture, something new becomes visible … Something new is always coming into sight, displacing what was previously seen and certain" (Denzin, 1989, p.81). A different view that has been expressed about watching self incorporates a claiming of the self that has been represented in the story. For instance: I love my story, seeing it played out by other people, my response was, ‘You guys rock’ but then later I thought, ‘Hey that was me, I rock' (Kylie, Rec09a, L47).

Kylie also speaks of the potency of telling 'a group of strangers without all the background' (Rec01, L15) her story. From this perspective, she has seen that the actors have the 'freedom' (Rec09, L143) to say what she has felt she could not say, things that have felt too risky to say: the 'hurtful bits'. She is pleased that the actors expressed these aspects of her story. She states: Seeing emotions that were my emotions was very powerful. The experience of seeing it. I didn't go into that detail but they picked up and ran with it. They were the exact kind of things, messages that I had received from society or from family, things that were so horrible that I didn’t want to say those things (in public). But then when you have the experience of the actors telling that stuff – they don’t have those restraints, they have what they heard and they have an audience to highlight it too (Kylie, Rec09, L137).

This notion of risking is a fundamental element in the making of improvised theatre. Brook (1989) reports that it maximises the potential of the work to be simultaneously influenced by those present – audience and performers alike. Penny (2002) suggests that it is the job of the Playback Theatre actor to risk in the way Kylie describes and meet or match the risk the audience member took in telling the story. Kylie's comment also emphasises the performative context: 'they have an audience to highlight it too'. Theory suggests that this dialectic between performer and audience can evoke open dialogue where people turn toward one another

(Howard 2003). The risk and daring implicit in theatrical performance combined with the deconstruction of societal protocols through ritual enables individuals at Playback Theatre to reach beyond the limits of language to include other forms of expression in the dialogue (Brook, 1968, Grotowski, 1968, Howard, 2003). As such, the Playback Theatre performance could be likened to Brook's (1989) description of community performance as a way to overcome loneliness and reduce the distance between people, outcomes van Erven (2001) and Cohen (in Amit, 2002) suggest constitute an experience of community for those present.

The storytellers' responses to the enactment have been varied with a number of views being expressed. One view is that the enactment has evoked the feeling from that time (Jul03, L191). Some tellers express the view that watching the enactment has been 'powerful'. Overall, their responses to the enactment have tended to be generous. Observation and reflective data suggest that the enactment could sometimes misrepresent or skew the story. This has been the case in Lorraine's story. Lorraine told her story at the Reconciliation performance. In the following excerpt she is describing her experience of a workshop she has attended to learn the ancient aboriginal craft of weaving flax-fibres. She speaks about learning:

When they instructed us, well they didn’t, they weren’t teaching at all. They didn’t explain anything and then you’d sort of have to work it out. I was real uncomfortable with them. If you asked them a question, they might or might not answer you. If they didn’t feel like answering they just wouldn’t. It was as if you hadn’t spoken. … I didn’t know how to handle the situation. … I felt there was a gap that I didn’t think I could bridge. … It was difficult and uncomfortable

(RecVT, L253).

The enactment has highlighted Lorraine's attempts to communicate with the women. It has shown that each overture she made was seemingly ignored or missed. The aboriginal women continued to focus on the weaving task. In the enactment, the two worlds were brought to life through music and action: the eager white women, asking questions, preparing food, feeling hurt and the industrious black women, certain in their weaving, uncertain in their social role.

Telling a story in the midst of her uncertainty about the experience, as Lorraine has done, is not uncommon (Boje, 1991). Lorraine's unresolved confusion and discomfort have brought her forward to tell. Unlike Boje's finding that the story in uncertain times helps people "make sense of equivocal situations" (1991, p.106), Lorraine has continued to feel the tension of her unmet expectation about how the intercultural meeting would be. Later, in a discussion group, she says:

I’d had this experience only a couple of weeks back, and it was really fresh, and it had been bothering me … its something I have been unable to resolve. … I’m not one of these people that easily bridge the gap, with different people. I can be fearful of doing that … Lots of good things happened, I had a great time. It was probably just the relationship that I had very mixed feelings about. I have guilty feelings too (Lorraine, Rec03, L78).

Her admission of guilt has expanded what had been told and replayed on stage. Yet, this expression of guilt does not seem to alter her relationship with the experience. Perhaps she does not see herself or her experience represented in what the actors have created on stage.

My observation notes suggest that this is the case. The enactment does not sufficiently represent the disappointment she has felt at the missed meeting, and confusion she has felt about why she missed it. Zánkay (1999) asserts that this is the job of the enactment. Fox (1999b) proposes that when tellers or audience do not see on stage what was embodied in the story, or at the pitch at which it had been present in the story, they will tell a similar story until the actors get it. The story that was told after Lorraine's has contained this theme about confusion over how to embrace indigenous culture, among other things. Lorraine revealed that she has remained conflicted about the incident at the workshop when I contacted her more than a year later. She has confided in me that she still felt some confusion and disappointment and has continued to try to make sense of the experience (Rec16).

**7.3.2 Watching self: stories told by another**

Another way an audience member may encounter himself or herself on stage is when they feature in a story told by another. The telling of personal stories during the Playback Theatre ritual signifies a convergence in the tellers' private and public spaces. Observational and interview transcripts indicate that many people attend the Playback Theatre performances with one or more others. As I allude too earlier, while Playback Theatre is a participative form, there are many people at each show who do not get the chance to tell their story publicly.

Next (through the stories of both Nathaniel and Asha), I explore the experiences of those audience members who are featured in stories told during a Playback Theatre performance but who are not the tellers of these stories.

Nathaniel has been in the audience of the Mental Health Week performance when his sister has come to the stage to tell a story. The story has featured Nathaniel and Larry, his brother-in-law64. In discussion with him some days after the performance I ask him to share his experience. When he recounts the incident, he speaks of the public telling as if Hillary had been speaking directly to him from the stage. He says, 'I was told that Larry didn't want me anymore' (MHW06, L26). He expresses his deep hurt at what he had heard:

I remember Hillary saying that Larry didn't want me around anymore. That was a bombshell. I thought I had been getting on with Larry pretty well. I was devastated (Nathaniel, MHW06, L7).

During this conversation with Nathaniel, he is quick to add that he has been pleased to know the truth and he suggests that he might never have known if Hillary had not told a story during the Playback Theatre performance. It's as if the public forum has provided a contained yet expansive space to hold the two of them while Hillary confesses her secret. Perhaps more importantly, it has been at a place where both can be supported individually, as the following comment from Nathaniel suggests:

I'm glad it came out, and I'm glad I had support there when it did come out. If we had been at home it would have hit me like a ton of bricks, which it did do at the play thing, but I had support there. That helped a lot, and other people that were there, who couldn't give me support at that time, gave me support later on

(Nathaniel, MHW06, L400).

Hillary's act of telling could be interpreted as a way of reaching out and has opened the way for others in the community to reach back. Ahmed (2000) asserts that the act of reaching out

64 This story is first introduced in the previous chapter, in the section *Heightened Connection*.

could mediate estrangement in the limbo that exists between family and society. Nathaniel has used the somewhat public space of the interview with me as an opportunity to speak further about what has previously been too risky in the private realm. In front of me, he admits to Hillary that he has found it difficult to raise issues that might place her under emotional pressure. The following is an excerpt of the conversation:

N: Hil was grieving and I think she still is grieving, so maybe I didn't go into it as deeply as I wanted.

H: What else did you want to say?

N: I think if we talked about it (what was revealed in the story), emotions would come up and I may not be able to express it. Off the top of my head I can't think of a particular thing I wanted to say, but I'm thinking you're still grieving a bit (MHW06 L200).

Nathaniel appears pragmatic about the way the details of his private life, of which he had otherwise been unaware, have been illuminated in the Playback Theatre performance. He expresses his appreciation of what Hillary has done and acknowledges that he has struggled with the fact he could not confront Larry now because he is deceased. As the interview progresses Hillary and Nathaniel engage in a conversation about other family members and their responses to living with Nathaniel and the reality of his mental illness. The ritual containment of the Playback Theatre performance has enabled the story to be shared among more than the two family members and thus has overcome what Ahmed (2000) identifies as the potential estrangement they might have experienced from one another and the community. As reported earlier, the audience members' responses to Hillary and Nathaniel suggest a collective transformation of the estrangement. Nathaniel claims that the number of people who have approached him after the telling has been instrumental in him coming to terms with his feelings of shame and betrayal (MHW06). Hillary had not been prepared for the extra attention she has received after telling her story. Either way, this brother and sister have embraced the consequences of the experience and have seen each other in a new light, and have been seen by their community in a new light.

There had been no formal acknowledgement of Nathaniel's presence at the performance. No time was made for him to respond in the public forum. He later claimed he had wanted to 'get up and talk' at the performance (MHW05, L13). It is my observation that the performance ended abruptly due to time constraints. Ideally, the form would address Nathaniel's right of reply or response by naming or inquiring about the links from the teller and her story to the audience and their stories. While this is sophisticated conducting and a rudimentary element to my practice, the abbreviated ending has resulted in this breach in the ritual. My journal entry implicates the loss of time due to the politician as a likely cause. Yet this is overly simplistic and negates the influence of the broader social process on the performance. The enabling of Hillary's telling was not solely mediated by the Playback Theatre ritual, but rather was a response to the highly organised context, her relationship to the context, and her immediate understanding of what the Playback Theatre process could facilitate for both her and the group (MHW01). Nathaniel's response has eventually been facilitated in an elongated incorporation of the experience made possible by the research process.

As a non-telling participant, the placement of the performance in the Mental Health community during the specially nominated week has contributed to an extended context for Nathaniel. He has been able to keep talking about his experience with people who have been there with him. This extension of the Playback Theatre ritual does not occur in all cases. The next story is as example of this.

A non-telling participant who features in another's story can have a complex mix of responses that have long lasting resonances. In Nathaniel's experience, there is some resolution after the initial shock of learning that Larry had felt antagonistic about Nathaniel needing support. The public airing of the family secret has enabled he and his sister to discuss a difficult topic. Stories told by audience members that have featured another audience member are not always 'secrets', or 'news' to the non-telling participant. Yet, the new light shed by a public telling, or through the dramatisation of the story, can induce unexpected feelings of vulnerability and confusion. This has been Asha's experience as her prospective son-in-law told a story that has featured her, the young couple and their unborn child (the story is summarised previously in *Connection*).

As Liam tells his story at the March Public Performance, Asha listens experiencing conflicting emotions. She states:

[The story] involved members of my family and me, and was highly charged for me. … I am a participant in the story but it's not my version of what we shared. … I was a little bit astounded that that was the issue that Liam presented as the bone of contention between him and me. It reminded me of how incredibly vulnerable and raw they were on that morning (Asha, March03, L31, L95, L210).

While watching the dramatic enactment, Asha experiences a 're-running' of the event: The feelings of the time - the experience - came up for me. There was visual imagery and connections, and embroidering of the story with my reality. My version of the story was running for me, not Liam's version for him, not my version of Liam's, but my version of mine. Afterwards I felt like a lot of soil dug over, from having relived my version of me again. In addition to having lived Liam's version of me and him. That was new soil. New soil turned and old soil turned again (Asha, Mar03, L641).

Speaking with her later, Asha admits that she *knew* what Liam was going to tell because he had spoken with her and his friends about it during a short intercession in the performance. Yet she found herself being surprised by the content of the story and by her response. When I first approach her to discuss the performance her response to the experience is:

I *feel* I own that story, I didn't tell it but I feel extremely territorial around that story. In the light of looking at it in a public, or Ph.D. context, my threat levels go extremely high (Asha, Mar03, L11).

Shuman (1986) writes of the sense of ownership that tellers can feel over their own story. In expressing ownership over the story Asha explains that it had more to do with her feelings of exposure and her surprise over the emphasis in Liam's version of the story. In a second interview she explains that she felt the story has put her in a bad light. This has made her feel vulnerable to criticism from the audience. She expresses ongoing surprise about the focus of Liam's version of the story. She states:

I was surprised that (the funeral) was the issue of conflict for Liam, with him and me, all year, I thought the area of conflict was somewhere else (Asha, Mar03, L223).

Asha's reference to an alternative area of conflict concerned domestic and social issues she and Liam have periodically clashed on in the eighteen months since the premature delivery and subsequent passing of the baby. The public exposure of the issue has assisted her to see Liam in a new light. She says:

[When] it was time to talk about the funeral and we had our different views about how it should happen, it was very intense. It was quite clear, that there were differences. Only in retrospect (after seeing the story), do I realise that the

[decision] was more traumatic for them. It was their issue and perhaps they should have had autonomy over it (Asha, Rec03, L212).

As in Nathaniel's experience, Asha has come to understand more through the dialogic treatment of the family story within the (public) ritual process of Playback Theatre. Liam's representation of Asha in the telling and the interpretation of this by the actors has provided Asha with a mirror depicting some of Liam's perspective of her at that time. This perspective has not equated immediately with her perspective of herself. By engaging with what she saw and heard in Liam's telling and the enactment she has at first been critical of herself, which has led to her becoming more open to Liam's experience of the event. She has eventually become less critical of herself as she has come to see the context within which the interaction occurred. Asha's experience shows that when we share a personal experience in public there is scope for a new kind of self-consciousness about our own and others' feelings. The liminal space of the Playback Theatre performance destabilises the threshold between what is public space and what is private space, and who has authority over what is told. The dynamics of both Nathaniel's and Asha's experiences could be understood in terms of Sennett's (1977) claim that the idealised refuge of the family is limited and individualising. Through Hillary and Liam sharing tragic experiences with others, they have reached beyond the estrangement that had begun in the family and beyond the post-modern malaise of self-sufficiency, to a place of communal or collective experience and a plurality of points-of-view (Delanty, 2003).

**7.4** **Seeing Others**

As spectators, audience members witness the stories of others. One informant speaks about feeling privileged in witnessing a story. He states, 'It was a real privilege, the little girl telling her story of this ordeal and having her mum and dad in the audience' (MDA04, L15, see also MDA14, L12). Here I describe audience members' experience of overcoming estrangement when they have an experience of *seeing* another. This may be someone they already know or someone who is otherwise unknown to them. This has occurred at the performances where people are in the audience with other people with whom they work. Observation and interview data suggest that in this situation, the Playback Theatre ritual facilitates new meetings among people beyond the usual small talk of 'what we eat for lunch, and … what we wear' (DAW06, L70). This phenomenon has been particularly apparent at the Disability Action Week, Mental Health Week and Refugee Week performances where people have attended in their professional roles. The story form offers an alternative way of disclosing personal information. Informants express positive responses to co-workers or colleagues who have shared a story. For instance:

Seeing people actually open up, people come up with things that I would never have thought people would've brought up originally, personal experiences that they just would not have talked about possibly, was really stimulating (Victoria,

DAW06, L805).

Another view is that disclosure by a co-worker or colleague within the collective Playback Theatre experience builds or extends previous connections. This has occurred at the Refugee Week performance where people are familiar with each other due to their involvement in the refugee and asylum seeker support sector. Ariel, a leader in the field, has been particularly attentive when another prominent leader in the sector has come to the stage to tell his story. She comments, 'I have known [colleague] for over six years and never knew his personal life.

And his staff didn't know any of it. It was really great' (Ariel, MDA01, L21.). In another instance, the public disclosure has led co-workers to build on the new intimacy as the following quote suggests:

I came with Gerard (a male colleague). He was really in there. I saw another side of him. It took our friendship to another level. [After the performance] he opened up and spoke about his daughter and how he missed her, and broke down (Shelly, MHW01, L37).

Shelly's statement suggests that she has been able to continue to build on the shared experience after the performance. This opportunity to act again on what has been heard within the performance is also addressed in a previous section when I report on the way in which audience members approached Hillary and Nathaniel after the Mental Health Week performance.

As is alluded to in Victoria's experience above, watching the enactment can illuminate others' perspectives on the world. Previously, I have reported Asha's surprise at what Liam had focused on in the telling of his story. On hearing his version of the story, she has gained a new perspective and could see how vulnerable he was at the time. Transcripts from the discussion groups reveal that the Playback Theatre experience is a way for audience members to see the human side of people and enable them to expand their view of the world and their response to others (Pride02, L1132). The following excerpts demonstrate this:

You're only ever going to see an issue from your own perspective. That night it was a very powerful presentation of a number of other quite different perspectives, and so I don’t think I can walk away from something like that and not have my own position broadened. I am seeing it from more angles than what I did before.

… I believe that those stories have come into my repertoire and enable me to see reconciliation in a more nuance-d kind of way (Helen, Rec08, L393).

At times this new perspective is highly specific as the following comment reveals: It broadened my understanding of what it’s like to be a person from a non-english speaking background and it broadened my understanding of relocation issues (Sharon, MDA14, L33).

The chance to gain another perspective is not unusual in theatre (Brook, 1989). Theatre provokes consciousness and seeks to transform attitudes and perceptions. Within the Playback Theatre ritual it is not a script that actors are bringing to life, it is a real life story, in the presence of the (real life) teller. Perhaps this juxtaposition of reality and fiction enlarges the impact of seeing another's point of view, of seeing The Other. Perhaps in seeing the other in this forum renders audience members more open to the possibility of transformation of their preconceived attitudes. Another possibility is that it might be too risky to depict stories of the other on the public Playback Theatre stage. This has emerged in the Refugee week performance where professionals have been concerned that if refugees speak in public they might jeopardise their chances of securing temporary residency. Some of the informants from this show have applauded the possibility that a more vulnerable person's story can be told indirectly when they feature in someone else's story. In this way, the more vulnerable person can be present in the enactment as opposed to having to tell a story themselves. They claim that the enactment provides a place for more vulnerable people to be seen without there being any pressure on them to tell. One informant makes this point by referring to a story that a woman told about living in Amman as a teenager. In the story, the woman recalls her experiences of living there with her family for a year, and her memories of feeling very white and conspicuous. The story ends with a scene at the airport: after her family have been admitted with minimal scrutiny, a Pakistani man has been searched mercilessly, his possessions spread all over the counter and eventually a precious, well-bound package filled with nuts has been ripped opened. The nuts scatter to every corner of the room, all over the floor. She remembers him on his knees recovering his nuts. Of this story, Ariel says:

The [story about the] woman at the airport. That was powerful. We all knew. We all could see. It was just as powerful as having a Pakistani man tell the story but without risk of him being further humiliated (Ariel, MDA01, l77).

Sensitivity about tellers' vulnerability has emerged regularly in the interviews with informants generally admitting that they have not been sure how they feel about people exposing themselves through their stories. This is explored in more depth later in the chapter when I present audience members opinions about follow-up and debrief in Playback Theatre.

During a conversation with reflective partners Craig queries my influence as conductor stating, 'In a way, you actually manipulate the action. I wonder whether what you say can take the whole evening in a certain direction?' (OD01, L84). This is a genuine concern. In addition to the stories that have been told by audience members and the text that has been presented in the enactment, audience members have found themselves connecting with what I say as conductor. One example of this has occurred at Mental Health Week show. Here I have told a story from my own life as a way to move the performance from the didactic non-interactive space left by the politician to one that would bring the audience toward the open interactive Playback Theatre space. One audience member suggests that this has been a key moment: I think the trueness of your sharing and the authority with which you could lead the show, really added another layer to the trust (Lynette, MHW04, L113).

Reflective data suggest that The Company's opening sequences appear to be echoed in the stories told during performances. What I, as conductor, emphasise throughout the performance could influence the stories that are told. Perhaps more significantly, what I say, notice, and act on could result in silencing a prospective teller (OD01, L1076). It is as if, when the ensemble joins with the audience we are equally affected and affecting.

So far in the chapter, I have reported on audience members' experiences of the Playback Theatre performance. To accomplish this I have presented audience members voices as they reflect on their experience *after* the performance. In the post-performance period audience members continue to respond to the performance. This period is considered part of the formal ritual event and will be discussed in the following section.

**7.5** **Post-performance**

Guss (2001) and Turner (1969) both write about van Gennep's third stage of the ritual experience, that of incorporation. Incorporation occurs as the audience exits the liminal and involves re-integrating any new perspectives they may have gained as they resume their social roles in society (Guss, 2001). Cabral (2001) asserts that audience members might experience transformation at this time due to the way in which the ritual structure enables them to explore situations that would otherwise be "tense" (p.56). For the purposes of this next data set I align the incorporation phase Turner speaks of with the cool down and aftermath stages in Schechner's (1985) schema65 of the performance process. The cool down correlates to the post-performance time when audience members are engaged in discussion groups and incidental conversations at the venue and during the period immediately after this. Aftermath refers to those experiences that occur after cool down or persist beyond the cool down phase. The patterns that have emerged from the transcripts indicate that the after-show period could be an intense time for audience members. This section organises these experiences into three categories. These are stories, reflection and action, and debrief.

**7.5.1 Stories**

As discussed in the section on participation, audience members' experience their stories and memories surfacing during the Playback Theatre performance. The interview and after-show discussion group transcripts reveal that a regular post-performance experience has been telling the stories that audience members do not get to tell during the performance. One way in which this has occurred has been for people to engage in a spontaneous session of telling stories as they have remained seated in the audience or while they stood around in the foyer. The research process has facilitated this activity further through the organisation of discussion groups after some events (see for examples Rec01, 02 & 03, and MHW04).

The sharing of stories has continued after the show as people found themselves telling those stories left untold during the performance. At times, people have been further reminded of stories they had not recalled during the performance as is illustrated in Appendix 9. Another way people shared stories that have been awoken during the performance came in the form of admitting to me during interviews that they have felt it would not have been appropriate to tell

65 Schechner's (1985, p.16) schema named seven stages of the performance process: training, workshops, rehearsal, warm-up, performance, cool down and aftermath.

them, and then proceeding to tell me (see Rec05, L426, Pride04, L88, DAW03, L83). One woman announces 'my story might have been too crass' (Rec15, L22). Another reflects on whether the group would have accepted her story, as it was different to other stories. She says, I felt bad that I don't feel angry about the aboriginal situation. I felt badly that I

couldn’t claim that. I was unsure about where I was at with it all (Nancy, Rec14,

L27).

This post-performance experience has extended beyond the immediate cool down to include encounters with me two and three weeks after the performance (see for example MHW01, 03, 04, 05, DAW05, 07, MDA01, 10, 11). For many of these audience members re-engaging with me had the effect of reminding them of the stories they may have told during performance. When this has occurred it appeared to me that people felt some compulsion to tell me what they have recalled.

This after-show process of telling stories can be understood in terms of the way in which the ritual experience evokes reflection (Turner 1982). In telling their stories after the show, it is possible that audience members were reflecting through narrative (Bruner, 1986) by thinking in stories (Frank, 1995). What is most notable about the stories that have been told outside the formal ritual performance is that they often introduced new content about the social worlds and values of the collective audience. The story below has been told after the reconciliation performance. It was a very recent experience for the person unlike the other stories told that evening. It introduces new themes of social responsibility and casual interaction with respect to indigenous Australians.

I had a story (that happened to me) this evening. I was cruising down the street and there’s this guy playing the tin whistle and he had a hat out. Usually we give some money but I stayed and listened for a bit. Then, I walked along a bit further and there was this group of aboriginal people. There were three guys, and one man came up and I shook his hand and then they said, hey, have you got $2 to spare and normally I think in the past I’ve given them money, and this time I didn’t. I was working on this idea that if you, people never become dependent, independent and by giving people money to buy beer, booze, you basically keeping them in that particular situation. For me, I felt when I walked away, that I should’ve given something. That's a paradox for me. It was like an anti-reconciliation act. My memory is still there, and right here and now the question is what can we do?

What will be most effective? Anyway, I thought I’d just share something that happened tonight that was really quite a difficult experience for me (Jake, Rec02, L56).

Jake's story is integrated with his reflection about the incident. He says 'my memory is still there' and indicates it was difficult. In my observation notes I speculate again about the dilemma in this story regarding a missed connection across cultures. Is it another story that possesses the same kind of angst that was present in Lorraine's story? The content and sentiment in this story indicate that the after-show storytelling ritual may have been reserved for stories people may have felt unable to tell because of fear of being politically incorrect, or revealing too much. This aligns with Burkett's (2003) notion that political correctness is "a barrier for truthful storytelling" and inhibits people sharing their real stories for fear they will not be "socially acceptable" (p.13). The telling of these stories in the less formal arena may also represent the teller's effort to rehearse the telling of an experience they were, as yet, unable to bring into a larger public arena. As such, the teller may be able to begin to reflect. However, denying these stories in the collective space could serve to limit the potential for societal and personal reform that Bruner (1986) suggests emerges when intimate interactions occur in a public forum.

Another way stories have featured in the post-performance period has been when audience members have engaged in telling stories about telling stories (Boje, 1991) and telling stories about hearing stories. A number of informants report telling stories about their experience of the Playback Theatre event. One claims to use the Playback Theatre experience as a way to gain perspective on the original experience (MHW03, L59) or as an extension to the re-telling of the original story (Pride05). In the latter example, the informant explains that she now tells the story, and 'adds the Playback Theatre bit' (L43). Another informant claims to have told people about the experience of telling her story. She suggests that this has been a way to keep talking about the story and about her experience at Playback Theatre (Rec09, L30). She states:

'I was ringing people the week after and telling them … my friends wanted to know what my story was and how it was acted out' (Rec09a, L2). Others have told about telling and have told about the Playback Theatre experience so that they could encourage friends and family to come to the next show (Jul04, L71). This practice of telling stories about telling, and telling about the experience of the performance in general could be considered in Frank's (1995) terms as thinking (or reflecting) in story. The next section considers the way in which the Playback Theatre experience influences or activates reflection in audience members after the performance.

**7.5.2 Reflection and Action**

Audience members at the Playback Theatre performances speak about coming away from the show 'with a lot going on in my head' (Rec14, L51) and needing 'time to process how I was affected ... [and] time to take it in' (DAW08, L25). This experience of delayed reflection could be linked to an experience of flow for audience members who may have been in-the-moment during the performance and not necessarily engaged in cognition (Bundy 2001). Turner (1982) suggests that reflection and reflexivity hinder flow. However, the thoughtfulness of audience members at the end of the performance could be a continuation of the reflection they have undertaken within the performance. The various foci that have emerged as central to the reflective efforts of audience members include: the form, emotional and cognitive responses to the content, context, and audience, debate about values and/or questions raised in the show, and personal reflection.

As reported early in the chapter, audience members have engaged in parallel processes whereby they have been simultaneously active spectators and distanced reflectors. Reflection on and about the form has continued after the event with particular emphasis on audience members' engagement with the form or what the form delivered. One spectator claims that she was walking away with a sense of hope after witnessing the way in which others engaged in the invitation to tell and listen to stories (Rec07, L166). Another reflects on how the form offers what she saw as an alternative to therapy. She says:

You can reveal your humanity, whereas if you go to a therapy group it's, well there can be competition around who's unfixable, but it's also a bit, for me, always a bit focussed on how do we solve the problem. Who needs a kick up the arse? The generosity, for me, doesn't come out. Its like we can all whine together and that's acceptable. Whereas this somehow walks away from that in terms of saying: 'you can be safe with feeling here' and I can look at a person and feel for them, without them having to deal with me in any way, shape, or form later. It touches our humanity, and its easy, it is much easier to be generous because there's not that responsibility (Bea, Pride02, L1188).

The idea expressed here is similar to the arguments about what a new conception of community might be like (see for example, Ahmed, 2000, Amit, 2002, Delanty, 2003). Rather than the individualised and perhaps pathologising experience of therapy (Sennett, 1977), Bea's comment suggests Playback Theatre offers an alternative for people wanting to overcome isolation and estrangement. Other reflections have been on what was not gained or what the form does not achieve in given contexts. One audience member states, 'It showed we are concerned but I don't know what we've done for reconciliation. I certainly don't think we had any argument from this group' (Rec02, L36).

Audience members have reflected on what they see as the values implicit in the form including some discussion about the way in which the form is accessible and promoted voluntary participation (MDA03, Jul01, MHW04). Discussions have revealed that Playback Theatre addresses diversity and equity (Jul05, L373, Rec01, L281) and promotes the importance of sharing stories in our culture (Rec07, L48). Alternatively, there has been reflection on the limitations of the form. One limitation that has been highlighted emerged at the Mental Health show. Here the audience mainly comprised carers and service providers in the mental health sector. The after-show discussion group transcript indicates that many of those present with a mental illness had removed themselves during the politician's opening speech. The stories told in the performance came from mothers, wives, workers, and others who live with people with mental illness. One audience member criticises Playback Theatre for silencing people with mental illness through not including their stories. He states:

[It needed to have] a variety of stories, about paranoia, anxiety, psychosis, manic depression, melancholia, multiple personality disorder, that's misunderstood,

people get schizophrenia and MPD mixed up. … [It needed] more points of view: carer, consumer, mental health professionals, [the] general community. [The] point of view of friends or maybe the enemy. Even on the same topic, you can have different acting, different perspectives from different people. This would give insight into the way that other people think. For example, some health professionals are very stigmatizing and disempowering towards consumers, it could help if they saw different perspectives (Nathaniel, MHW05, L28).

An opposing view has emerged from the Refugee Week performance. Here an audience member expresses concern that people representing minority identities have felt pressured to tell to serve the performance or have been 'used' for the purposes of making theatre (MDA14, L37). A different view been expressed at the Pride performance suggests that the act of telling is a powerful position (Pride04, L86). Interestingly, at the Refugee Week performance an informant has commended the invitation to volunteer that she has seen as implicit in the form. She says that she felt that there had been 'no pressure' to tell and perhaps more importantly, that people could 'choose' and that they could tell their own versions of their stories (MDA03, L11). Perhaps the 'pressure' was coming from others in the audience, one informant at the same performance reports that she was 'sitting next to a man from Bosnia and there was a [woman] encouraging him to speak up but he wasn't ready' (MDA10, L29).

The discussion about diversity is extended by what an audience member has said when reflecting on the Disability Action Week performance. He suggests that it is not only important for people to be telling their stories, there must be diversity in those listening and watching, as the following excerpt reveals.

I've met with the [organising committee and told them] that next time [they] need to include members of the general public - it's about Disability *Action.* I'm happy to tell people about it … if it is going to be truly inclusive, it's important to have the audience members with disability who want to contribute a story … [and] people (from the general public) to see the other side of life for people with disability (Brett, DAW, L35).

Brett's comment is aligned with what Jakubowicz & Meekosha (2001) argue. They claim that society is constituted by "constantly reinforced networks of reciprocal recognition of social presence, and thereby of the right to participate in the defining of social agendas and cultural directions" (p.88). Hence the importance of ensuring diversity among tellers, and on the Playback Theatre stage. The importance of inclusion and diversity is further highlighted at this event when one participant suggests that people with disabilities should be on stage as actors.

This idea of matching the diversity on stage with that of the audience, especially at performances for particular populations, has been broached by an informant at the Refugee Week performance, as the following comment demonstrates:

You were so skilled but you remained ‘anglo’ or white and the stories weren’t. This is not a criticism, but an observation (Leeanne, MDA12, L1).

Another audience member reports:

Someone behind me took offence to the show, these white people doing this but they didn’t understand. Half way through he started to get it, but then made some more grumpy comments. I thought it was brave to stand up as a white person to tell others' stories. Maybe it did need to be black people or people of different cultures. There seemed to be an alienation of the actor which was (mirrored by) what was happening in the stories (Sebastian, MDA04, L16).

There have been a number of references to the use of an all-women ensemble (excluding the Pride performance, where there is a contract with the community to provide a 'women-only' space66) suggesting that gender diversity is also necessary when endeavouring to create an inclusive space. One male participant states, 'the thing that struck me was that there were three women on stage, or four women on stage, and two of them were older women, and I was quite surprised by that because basically it wasn’t balanced' (Darren, Rec05, L293). A younger woman in the audience has similar feelings of exclusion based on her reading of the ensemble. She states she saw 'a bunch of white middle-class (aged) women' (Rec10, L12).

66 While, after nine years the women still want to preserve this space as women-only, there have been comments in recent years of conducting a second performance that would be open to all queer-identified people. Further, we have recently inducted our first gay male into the Company, so there is also scope to offer a 'men-only' space in the next few years.

The limitations identified by these audience members are similar to those things that narrative scholars (see Bruner, 1986, Frank, 1995, Razack, 1993) propose are oppressive, and that they claim can be overcome through the promotion of personal story. Rappaport (1995) critiques the place of personal story and cautions against the indiscriminate use of narratives as resources, alluding to the risk of social control and oppression that Nathaniel and Brett refer to above. Nathaniel states that 'he wanted to talk' after Hillary told her story. As I report earlier, I had ended the show without recourse to him and in doing so, acted to silence him.

While Frank (1995) suggests that the telling of one story can liberate many voices, when we stage Playback Theatre with ensembles that lack diversity, as suggested above are we silencing voices through their lack of representation and our limited social and cultural knowledge?

Shuman (1986) suggests that such value judgements are dependent on the purpose of the telling, or the way in which stories are used. Rappaport (1995) however argues that whether we like it or not, some stories actively devalue people, while others are not recognised as valuable at all. Who dares judge? Regardless of whether judgement is intended, in the fields of scholarship drawn together in this thesis: performance, ritual, theatre and narrative, it is argued that we can only listen, read, respond and act from within our social, cultural and political framework. Further discussion about the limitations of the Playback Theatre ritual, this time in terms of follow-up and debriefing processes, occurs later in the chapter.

The after-performance period reflection process also includes what audience members have referred to as reflective discussions. Some informants comment that the discussion groups that I have organised for the purposes of the research have facilitated a reflection in dialogue.

This has been particularly appreciated after performances within contexts that generated difficult issues, for example reconciliation and mental health (Rec08, L379, DAW03, L72). I now present some examples of reflective conversations or discussion by audience members.

Melanie had invited her mother to accompany her to the performance. She admits that her main purpose in bringing her mum was so she was not on her own. She speaks about how the shared experience has led to a significant conversation:

What was really great was that it (the performance) generated discussion with my mother I'd never had before. I learned things about my mum I never knew and it led to a very deep discussion. I love her, and feel like she's my best friend, she's so gentle and caring and I didn't think she felt so strongly about things. She told me how she felt about the aboriginal stuff, 'they're not the only race or people whom suffered.' She's pretty angry that they (the aborigines) are still caught up in the anger. I haven't heard her talk about this stuff before, so I sat back and listened to her (Melanie, Rec13, L7).

While Melanie was reserved about expanding on her conversation with her mother, her tone of voice and manner indicate that she has been appreciative of the opportunity the performance has afforded her.

For others the experience of sharing a reflective conversation such as this is not new but the influence of the performance has made it so. In the following excerpt an audience member reflects aloud with his partner. On the eve of the birth of their first babies (twins) Craig and Louella recount the conversation they had after the Reconciliation performance. They are referring to a story told by a young woman about her experience of prejudice in a corner store.

This is an edited version of their discussion:

C: That was the most powerful story that I found all night. It was about what I hold dear: it was about treating people with humanity… I look at everything with 'parent hat' on now, that's a different perspective for me. I want my children to grow up with empathy and respect, and tolerance and understanding and L: and justice, and those sorts of things, and then we talked about – as parents, 'how do we make sure that our kids are respectful?'

C: I would be horrified if my son treated someone like that. To me that would be the most horrific thing (OD1, L729).

It is more than likely that Craig and Louella would have eventually had a conversation about the values they hold dear. However, the shared experience of the concrete example provided by the story and illuminated by the enactment has possibility enabled them to express themselves more fully. Perhaps the experience of listening to others at the performance has influenced them to listen better to each other during their conversation. It is possible that the story has provided a bridge for them to talk about their ideals and their hopes and dreams as parents. Brook (1989) suggests that the intensity of the dialectic created during a theatre performance merges public and private truth. Craig has been able to express his contempt for the way in which the young woman in the story has been treated and in doing so has revealed his values. Meanwhile, Louella has interpreted his response to the story through her own interpretation of the story.

Craig and Louella have engaged in a conversation in which they express the values that they feel are just. There is also data from couples who have revealed that their post-performance reflection involved critical reflection on judgements they made during the performance. Bea and Sarah are a female couple who attended the women-only Pride performance. Their post-performance discussion involved an examination of their strong response to (resentment of) the presence of a baby at the Pride show. They have admitted that this persistent judgement of the baby and his mothers' choice67 to bring him had bothered them and interfered with their capacity to enjoy the performance. They have confided in me that they had a discussion about 'can you be judgmental about women who have children?' (Pride02, L425).

These three examples demonstrate the way in which audience members have engaged in reflective discussion after the Playback Theatre performance. The example of Bea and Sarah shows that they have also engaged reflexively, critiquing the way in which they were thinking during the performance. Turner (1982) promotes the ritual process as a way to initiate reflection and transformation.

67 The baby had two mothers.

As suggested earlier in this section, when audience members are particularly affected, they want to share their experiences of Playback Theatre through telling stories about the event.

For a few audience members it was not enough to tell them about the event. For instance: You don't want to just share it, you want people to experience it. Society has become unconnected. This (Playback Theatre) connects us (Melanie, DAW03,

L29).

This response has regularly resulted in the audience member coming to the next show with others in tow. The data reveals that audience members often want to do more than just bring a few people along. They want to take Playback Theatre with them to other contexts. One claims:

I did think straight away that there might be an avenue for this here, with stuff that we do (with young men with head injuries). It could be an avenue for people to voice stuff that never gets a chance to come out (Carly, DAW08, L625).

During the course of the research there have been a number of occasions where audience members' responses to their Playback Theatre experience has been to produce a Playback Theatre event. One example of this occurred when Melanie saw the reconciliation performance. She was in a position to mount a special event for Disability Action Week that year. She has since produced a second Playback Theatre event for Disability Action Week the following year. A second example involved a woman whose first response to Playback Theatre was to criticise its limitation in directing the content. Despite having a personal response that was mixed and somewhat less that she had anticipated, Jude has proceeded to organise a Playback Theatre event for Refugee Week.

A third example in the data does not involve mounting a special event in the audience members' specific context. Rather, it has resulted in the audience member bringing her practice context to a non-themed performance. Gigi was working as a counselor for young people with drug and alcohol dependency when she first encountered Playback Theatre. After her first experience of Playback Theatre she has brought three young women to the next performance by The Company. This has been followed by her attendance at the remainder of the Brisbane Playback Theatre Company shows that year, each time bringing different young people. By the final show of the year over half the audience were young people from the drug and alcohol clinic with the 'storytelling-space' that night almost totally occupied by this sub-group.

These strong responses toward some form of action to duplicate the experience of Playback Theatre for others in other contexts suggests that the values implicit in Playback Theatre meet the practice values of these contexts in some way. The refugee context, the disability context, and the rehabilitation context are all premised on values that promote personal agency, the liberation of voice and other anti-oppressive values. However it is not useful to apply Playback Theatre indiscriminately in these contexts based on this apparent congruity. There are data that raise questions about the responsibility of Playback Theatre in such contexts where practitioners endeavour to place vulnerable citizens at the centre. This is discussed in the next section through a consideration of where debrief and follow-up might feature in the post-performance period of Playback Theatre.

**7.5.3 Debrief & Follow-up**

Discussion about the limitations of the Playback Theatre ritual, in terms of follow-up and debriefing processes, has arisen from the Mental Health Week and Refugee Week performances. Informants express the view that some audience members at these shows are perceived as vulnerable due to their life experience and their status in the context, e.g., being a client. In both performances there have been numerous people in the audiences with whom others may be in a client-professional relationship based on the one-way telling of stories.

Thus, as Turner (1969, 1982) asserts, the ritual framework of the performance provides an opportunity to disturb the normative social structure and thus, this professional-client relationship.

Further skewing the status quo at the Mental Health Week performance has arisen from the possibility that the performance ritual may have been too intense for the clients of this context (MHW4, L1041). It is the vulnerability of the carers and professionals in this context, the people who do not often get to tell their stories of mental illness that has emerged through the stories. Carers and professionals are often required to listen to the stories of others (MHW04, L8). Again, I could conclude that the ritual process of Playback Theatre has enabled carers to voice their experiences of caring for someone with a mental illness (MHW06) and negotiating the medical system (MHW03, 09). Stories about coping with uncharacteristic - often hurtful -behaviour from their loved ones (MHW01, 09) and living day to day with little support and encouragement from among family and friends (MHW03, 04, 06, 09) have been expressed during this performance. The intensity of the emotions expressed has prompted queries about after-care and the need for debriefing. For instance in reference to Hillary's sharing, Joss reports that she and others have spoken about follow-up. She states:

[There is a] need for ongoing support for people who shared such big stories …

[While the clients often meet together in groups] the carers are on their own, and wouldn't come to all the groups. I've not met you (Hillary) before, and there are hundreds of carers out there. So there was some concern for you about how you would take that back into your life after such a big share (Joss, MHW04, L1070).

Hillary has her own opinion about it:

Why should the responsibility of follow-up rest with just playback theatre? Why not the individuals that are there, whether it's Mental Health or Consumer/Carers Group, or CAG, or anybody. You can get onto responsibility, that goes on and on and on, it's got to stop somewhere. It's your responsibility, if you thought of it, you reach out, you go and touch that person, you give them the hug, ring them up, find that person's phone number, it shouldn't be passed on (Hillary, MHW04, L1120).

A professional at the Refugee Week performance (MDA13, L39) expresses a similar awareness. Perhaps the performance is reflecting or expressing the social system within which it has occurred, or in Turner's words, "the social system it grows out of" (1986, p.22). The ritual has initiated this dialogue about who should enact follow-up in this community. Hillary's response suggests that this is a question for the larger socio-cultural context. As Turner suggests, the dialectic between the aesthetic of the drama processes and socio-cultural processes at this point in time reveal the broader cultural context (Turner, 1986, p.28). How might this community currently respond to one another in public displays of emotion? The Playback Theatre performance has opened a space to raise the question.

This example suggests that Playback Theatre can be thought of as part of a broader process in this context. Turner (1969) asserts that ritual processes enable the illumination of the structures of the society from which "subjects" separate in order to enter the liminal zone of the ritual. Further, this conversation represents part of the process of incorporation that occurs after the ritual experience for Joss and Hillary, both of whom are voicing potential for change in this context with respect to reaching out to others.

Similar concerns have been raised at the Refugee Week performance, however the sentiment is different, as the following excerpt from my journal suggests:

There is some feedback about debriefing. Same kinds of worries as the Mental

Health Week show but people are angry and hostile … it's all come from workers in the sector … [and] none of who told a story. One woman got angry that her friend became emotional, another called out during the show, something about

'these are people's lives not stories.' She was angry (Reflective Journal, October,

2002).

Again, informants' comments point to the likelihood that the non-hierarchical, non-

discriminatory environment of the Playback Theatre ritual has created a disturbance among professionals who have found themselves on unfamiliar terrain with regard to feelings and emotions. However, data also reveal a certain value within this context regarding professionals' responsibility to protect the refugee and asylum seeker. The outburst from the audience could be seen as one attempt to maintain professional control of the intimacy and sharing. One informant suggests that professionals have elected to tell stories during the performance to alleviate what they perceive as the pressure on the refugee and asylum seeker audience members to participate (see MDA03 & 10). Underpinning these actions are concerns that people would have their trauma experiences triggered (see MDA1, 12,13, & 14). As mentioned above, it has not been those who told stories who expressed these views. Some audience members who have expressed these views may have experienced a surge in their own stories and found this disconcerting (see for example MDA14). Interestingly, there was no reference to after-care by storytelling informants.

The context of this performance has influenced the intensity of the responses about aftercare and debriefing. The performance did touch audience members with experiences of torture and trauma. One example of this is the man who told his story about his treatment at the hands of the Australian government. Before he told his story he expresses that he thought his story was 'too big'. He says, 'I don't know where to start' (MHW01, L88). After the performance he was nowhere to be found. Interview data reveal that the context has provided a particular holding of him beyond the ritual frame. The following two excerpts are from professionals in the refugee sector who had contact with him, one in the immediate post-performance period and the other the next day. One reports:

I spoke with him afterwards. Even though the past was incredibly painful he wants to look to the future. There was some pressure on him to tell because new refugees think they *have* to tell. I could feel his discomfort. Afterwards I debriefed him, just chatting lightly about stuff – regardless of the story (Nina, MDA13, L19).

And another says:

I saw him on the weekend and I asked what happened (to him after the show) and he said 'I went out to have a drink.' We spoke about it, he said it's really important that stories have been told (Ariel, MDA01, L89).

These responses by the teller suggest that regardless of how difficult it is there is value in telling his story. This does not exempt the Playback Theatre Company from responsibility but does raise questions as to how to establish appropriate post-performance processes in contexts that have implicit in them the expectation that people will disclose. The ritual containment in these contexts can be somewhat skewed by patterns of habitual disclosure or as was suggested earlier in the chapter, the particularity of the refugee audience members who are vulnerable due to the use of their stories as currency in the resettlement process.

As the discussion above suggests, emotional responses to the Playback Theatre event have been met with confusion and criticism. Implicit in these responses are the values of the commentators, one of which calls into question the storytellers' rights, and the protocols around what Shuman (1986) calls the "use" of stories. This insinuates that rather than the act of storytelling being empowering for the teller, as Boje (1991) suggests, it becomes dangerous or arduous. Particular to this show in the study, has been the presentation of a child-teller. A ten-year-old daughter has told a story. Her mother, father and sister are seated in the audience and during the telling I have acknowledged them from my role as conductor, a number of times. My notes state, 'It was as if the entire family was sitting alongside me as she told her story' (Reflective Journal, October, 2002).

Her parents have clearly been moved by witnessing their daughter on-stage, her poise and clarity. Her story of fleeing Iraq did not explicitly evoke adult themes, yet the enactment has contextualised it in the conflict and alienation of war, and the leaving behind of her father and older brothers. This scene has been enacted as the start of the journey. At the end of the enactment the little girl beams as she watches their safe arrival in Australia. Her story has been a celebration. In the audience her parents have been weeping. So were many others. For the little girl's mother, the story has been a way to remember (Shank in Frank, 1995). As such, it pre-empted an emotional weekend for her as she expressed her deep grief and sadness at having to be separated from her sons (MDA16). Literature on the refugee experience suggests that in the early phase of flight displaced persons focus on the moment, focusing their psychological energy on survival "and uncertainty of the immediate future" (Baron, Jensen & de Jong, 2003, p.246). It is later that they will experience symptoms of stress. Baron et al. (2003) propose that when the experience of emplacement commences, i.e., when the refugee has a new home and residency security, opportunities for the type of self-expression Playback Theatre can facilitate is considered crucial, however many refugees may also require specific and long-term treatment. While the scope of this data limits the conclusions I can draw, it does raise questions about the adequacy of the warm-up and pretext for this specific context (e.g. the woman did not really understand what she was attending) and demands further attention. This data also raises questions about the contract with the audience in a Playback Theatre performance, particularly with respect to child-tellers (MDA01, L25).

The issues that have emerged from the refugee week performance could be considered an indication of a broader social or community process. This is aligned with Turner's notion of social drama as "an eruption" from the level surface of the social environment. If this is so, there is much to consider in the application of Playback Theatre within the refugee and asylum seeker context, and with respect to audience composition and performance purpose. This will be considered in greater depth in the next chapter.

**7.6** **Summary**

In this chapter I have presented data that suggest that audience members experience varying degrees of engagement with storytellers and their story, and the Playback Theatre ensemble and their interpretive enactment. This is related to their expectations of the event and any feelings of "familiarity" that they have or that they develop with the process and the people present. This familiarity is expressed as a feeling of connection with a storyteller, with the ideas expressed in their story, or with other people represented in their story. Failure to experience connection can lead to feelings of isolation and indifference. For some, connection occurs only when the story is dramatised. The dramatic presentation of the story also enables the individual to see glimpses of him/herself and to see others in a new light.

That these encounters with others occur in a community-based context heightens audience members’ experiences. The ritual framework and performative elements disturb the regular social context and the associated and expected social behaviours. This enables audience members to see others in a different light, question their initial responses to them and their stories, and find themselves moving toward the other as they negotiate various anomalies between their and others’ ideas, opinions, values, and perspectives. The individual and collective nature of the experience piques in people a curiosity about others, particularly the storytellers, and including the performers. This curiosity coincides with a softening of judgement and a move away from estrangement from and toward interest in the other. At times this leads audience members to feel protective of others.

Like all theatre, the Playback Theatre performance requires a coherent vision. If the origins of the vision are with the audience, then the conductor must work to embody the vision, as if an agent or representative of the community (audience group) has handed her a baton in a relay. After the staging the baton is handed back to the community. The way in which the context and the form interact through this handing over and back of authority or responsibility motivated the discussion about after-care that was presented in the chapter. The in-house show is different. Hosted by The Company, the vision must be clearly articulated and the event framed in such a way that audience preparation is going toward the idea. The embodiment of the vision is a dialectic process between the Company and the audience, and audience members with each other. This interactive collaboration and dynamic embodiment of the social responsibility of what happens in a Playback Theatre performance demands specific attention by both The Company and the community in which it performs.

Recommendations for the application of Playback Theatre are discussed in greater detail in the final chapter.